# Anticaster

Anticaster


Cut from the Air / Smash from the Air / Spellcut: These three feats are incredible magehunting feats that can be selected if you take the Martial Focus feat at an earlier level. Cutting arrows and ray spells out of the sky, substituting your BAB for your save bonus 1/round…it’s all coming together.
Step Up / Following Step / Step Up and Strike: I’m amazed that I don’t hear of people taking Step Up more often. First, it’s great against ranged enemies and spellcasters. Ranged enemies will be unable to escape you without an Acrobatics check or full withdraw action, and with clever use of readied actions, spellcasters can be interrupted every time they try to cast a spell, most likely breaking their concentration. Second, it allows you to stop the use of most magical items. If an enemy five-foot steps away, you follow; if they try to draw a potion, scroll, etc., you use your attack of opportunity to sunder the item. Boom. Third, by the time you get to Following Step, you’re getting some pretty amazing battlefield mobility even when it’s not your turn. Fourth, by the time you get to Step Up and Strike, you’re getting free damage for playing along with tactical movements that all Pathfinder PCs and monsters take all the time. What’s not to love?


Diabolic Style / Humiliation / Judgment: Diabolic Style is an excellent magehunting style for unarmed avenger vigilantes using the vital punishment vigilante talent and Step Up and Strike. If an enemy tries to five-foot step away from you, you follow them (Step Up), hit them with an attack of opportunity (Step Up and Strike) that deals Vital Strike damage (vital punishment), and force them to save or become staggered for at least two rounds. Ouch. Of note, unless you’re planning to take more than one attack of opportunity per round, Diabolic Judgment is probably overkill, since vital punishment already allows you to apply Vital Strike to any attack of opportunity you choose in a round.
Disruptive: Avenger vigilantes can pick up Disruptive at 12th level using the combat skill vigilante talent. (Not that you’d do that when mad rush is available, but I’m just here to point out options.) It’s a good anticaster feat, always, and that rule doesn’t break when the feat is tacked onto the vigilante class.
Divine Defiance: Bonuses to saves vs. divine spells and spell-like abilities. You could do a lot worse.
