# Core Classes

Core Classes


      * Bard: I really, really like the bard variant multiclass. Bardic knowledge is great, versatile performance is great, and inspire courage is obviously aces. For vigilantes who want more support through knowledge checks, face skills, and party buffing, this is the right play. Don’t forget that certain wondrous items like the banner of the ancient kings,the dervish sikke, and three reasons to live can offset the penalties to inspire courage or bardic knowledge!
      * Rogue: A stalker vigilante with a rogue variant multiclass is kind of like a “rogue plus”: you’ve got hidden strike, but also sneak attack; you get evasion without needing to burn a vigilante talent on it; and most of your combat efficacy can be handled through vigilante talents like lethal grace or twisting fear, rendering the loss of feats minimally painful. Definitely one of the best variant multiclass options available. Check out The Murderer build for an example of how this might work in practice.
      * Cleric: A polarizing variant multiclass option. Most Pathfinder players acknowledge that channeling energy is a weak option in combat, and even outside of combat, your effective cleric level is too low to do much healing; moreover, there aren’t any easily purchasable wondrous items that increase your effective cleric level, like there are for the bard’s class features. Domain abilities, however, are a different story: touch of chaos, fury of the abyss, touch of good, liberation, bit of luck, vision of madness, inspiring word…there are some incredibly powerful abilities granted to clerics at 1st level, and the variant multiclass suffers no penalty to your effective level or uses per day. If you have a specific domain ability that is absolutely essential to your playstyle, this is an option worth considering.
      * Sorcerer: There are a stupid number of sorcerer bloodlines, and even though I’m not all that familiar with the class, I know enough to know that some of those bloodlines are exceptionally powerful. Toss out any bloodlines that improve spellcasting, though, because, well, you’re not a spellcasting class.
      * Barbarian: The barbarian variant multiclass is decent, but hindered somewhat by the fact that barbarians need rage powers to offset the weaknesses of rage—weaknesses like your inability to use most skills while raging, or the sudden decrease in HP (Sudden Barbarian Death Syndrome) that occurs when a chained barbarian’s rage drops as they fall unconscious. You don’t gain your first rage power until 11th level in the variant multiclass, and although you could theoretically use feats after that to take Extra Rage Power, you don’t have many feats available with which to do so. Combine that with the smaller number of rage rounds per day that you receive, and I can’t strongly justify this choice for vigilantes.
      * Wizard: Some of the arcane schools are particularly tasty for vigilantes (aether, transmutation, etc.) but you’re somewhat limited by what’s likely to be a low Intelligence score. If for some reason you’ve pumped Intelligence, there really are great options available for combat classes when they add in some wizard tricks.
      * Druid: I’ve always felt like the druid variant multiclass was a cleverly disguised trap. The main thing you’d want from it is a fully scaling animal companion, but you can acquire that with the classic three-feat combo of Nature Soul → Animal Ally → Boon Companion. Wild shape, wild empathy, and the druidic code of conduct don’t do anything good for vigilantes.
      * Fighter: Ugh. What a bad variant multiclass. The only thing you might conceivably want out of it is weapon training to qualify for weapon mastery feats. If that’s the case, the Martial Focus feat is what you want, not whatever this travesty is.
      * Monk: It’s nice to be able to pick up scaling unarmed strike damage without Monastic Legacy or a monk’s robe, but those feats/items plus a dip in scaled fist unchained monk are ultimately much better for vigilantes than a full variant multiclass. Most of the monk’s goodies are frontloaded; you don’t truly need a ki pool, evasion, etc.
      * Paladin: Another instance where the 2-level dip is infinitely more powerful than the variant multiclass. Divine health, a 1/day smite evil, heavy armor proficiency, etc. should all be good enough for you, and they’re available with no loss of feats.
      * Ranger: Ranger is on the weaker side even as a fully fledged class, for crying out loud, much less a variant multiclass that gives you nerfed versions of every class feature. No.
