# Dealing Damage

Dealing Damage


Thanks to their different vigilante specializations, the vigilante class can expect to deal damage in two different ways, depending on their path. Avenger vigilantes play, in essence, like any other full-BAB martial class. No matter whether you’ve built for a two-handed, Strength-based melee build, a sword and board build, a Two-Weapon Fighting build, a Dexterity-based Weapon Finesse build, a ranged build—no matter what happens, you’ll take all the requisite feats (or their equivalent vigilante talents) and just kinda smash. We’ll get into ways and means in VIG 151: Vigilante Roles. If you’re a stalker, well, you should prepare to deal damage in exactly the same way that rogues do—that is, through pools of precision damage dice. Precision damage is finicky in that not all enemies are susceptible to it, and even those who are require you to have debuffed or outmaneuvered them in some way before you get your sweet, sweet hidden strike damage. The list of eligible debuffs or maneuvers is long, but includes mundane flanking (or weirder flanking situations such as Gang Up, Press to the Wall, Improved Outflank, or Circling Mongoose), blinding (typically through the dirty trick combat maneuver, but possibly also through magical darkness or fog), invisibility (a teisatsu vigilante’s vanishing trick, for example), feinting (with the cunning feint vigilante talent), mundane Stealth (hide in plain sight), and some demoralization tactics (notably Shatter Defenses). Since hidden strike will comprise such a large percentage of your damage, it’s unwise to leave your eggs in one basket. Instead, cleave to that old maxim of investment and diversify, diversify, diversify! Make sure you can use at least two routes, preferably three, and tailor your routes to the campaign you’re in—demoralization and feinting builds will have a rough time against undead, for example, since they’re mostly mindless. Beyond those general (and perhaps unhelpful) guidelines of “Play a vigilante like a fighter!” or “Play a vigilante like a rogue!” the same principle holds true as in the section above: vigilantes can be almost anything you want them to be. Vigilante talents are so effective at clearing away prerequisites, granting you bundles of feats, and gifting you bonuses found nowhere else in Pathfinder that you can essentially build whatever you can dream. Except ranged builds. Those are…weirdly unsupported in this class. More on that later.
