# Demoralization

Demoralization


        On their own, demoralization builds are nothing to write home about. You compare the result of an Intimidate check against 10 + an enemy’s HD + an enemy’s Wisdom modifier as a standard action. If you succeed, they become shaken (-2 penalty to most things) for at least 1 but potentially a handful of rounds. Now, Intimidate is a mind-affecting fear effect, so much like with feint, a good tranche of enemies are outright immune to it. What’s more, fear effects don’t cause enemies to lose their Dexterity bonuses to AC; unlike feinting—which is tailor-made to deny Dexterity—fear effects have to be massaged into doing that. The key feat here is Shatter Defenses, which makes an opponent flat-footed against every attack you make against them until the end of your next turn…if you can hit them while they’re already shaken, frightened, or panicked. This mandate is laughably easy for stalkers, who will probably already want to pick up Weapon Focus + Dazzling Display for their excellent twisting fear vigilante talent. Enforcer + the take ‘em alive vigilante talent is by far the easiest way to get single targets shaken with any weapon, and Dazzling Display does a habitually excellent job at handling crowds. You’ll typically lead with a Dazzling Display + twisting fear, then 5-foot step for a full-attack action (if you’re close enough) or charge for a hit to dole out flat-footed (if you’re far away), and finally continue full-attacking with hidden strike until the enemy is dead. Rinse and repeat for all remaining enemies, refreshing Dazzling Display + twisting fear as needed.
