# Feinting

Feinting


        But speaking of combat builds that involve face skills, let’s. In general, avengers have the luxury of not needing to care about feinting, demoralizing, etc., because their role is simple: get into the brawl and smash. For stalkers, though, it is essential that you have multiple ways to proc hidden strike. Teisatsu builds with vanishing trick are great, and you’ll never regret having a feat like Gang Up or Press to the Wall that allows you to flank more effectively. Ultimately, however, you need a method of proc’ing hidden strike that doesn’t rely on expendable resources (ki points from vanishing trick) or enemy/ally positioning (flanking). More esoteric tactics like darkness (Eclipsed Spell + continual flame, potentially), fog (smokesticks + ashen path, a goz mask, or fog-cutting lenses), or the Circling Mongoose feat might work, but the three workhorses most stalkers will use (beyond invisibility and flanking) are dirty tricks, feinting, and demoralizing. Dirty tricks (combat maneuvers generally, really) are a beast of their own, so we’ll skip those for now.
        Feinting compares the result of your Bluff check against 10 + an enemy’s BAB + an enemy’s Wisdom modifier. If you succeed at this standard action feint, they lose their Dexterity bonus against your next attack, allowing you to hit them for your reduced hidden strike damage. Feinting has…a lot of weaknesses, typically. You’ll take a penalty to feint anything other than a humanoid, and it becomes progressively harder to pull off the dumber enemies become—against mindless enemies, it’s outright impossible unless you’ve got some mesmerist dip lying around that I don’t know about. Moreover, the action economy is just bad, surrendering your standard action (ya know, the one you’d usually use to attack with?) for one hit at a later date. But fear not! As with all things except ranged combat, there’s a vigilante talent for that. Cunning feint neatly solves all your problems for you. At 1st level, you can feint as a move action (the equivalent of the Improved Feint feat, although it doesn’t count as that feat for the purposes of satisfying prerequisites), and at 8th level, you deny an enemy their Dexterity bonus to AC against all attacks until your next turn begins (the equivalent of the Greater Feint feat). Cunning feint tosses in one more bonus, though: you can replace your first attack in a full-attack action with a feint. This is incredible! Although you may still choose to feint as a move action and attack as a standard action (potentially with Vital Strike or something) when you need your best chances of hitting an enemy, sacrificing your highest-BAB attack can still be a smart choice if you’re burning down an enemy with low AC or if you already have a buff that grants an extra attack (think haste, blessings of fervor, or a monk’s flurry of blows) running.
