# Infiltration

Infiltration


        I don’t think I’m going out too far on any limbs by saying that vigilantes are the premiere class for infiltrating enemy organizations in Pathfinder 1e. Better than rogues or ninja? Oh, by a country mile, honey. Better than infiltrator or urban infiltrator inquisitors? A bit of a tougher sell, but the answer still ain’t no. Better than mesmerists? You bet your sweet bippy. Let’s break down what makes vigilantes so incredible at insinuating themselves deep undercover:
        First, vigilante talents and social talents are exceptionally good at getting this class into places it shouldn’t be. I’ve left some pairings below as examples, but even a cursory glance at their social talent list should let you know just how much the vigilante’s infiltration game slaps. It’s like getting an entire second class pasted onto a fighter or rogue chassis. Second, nearly all of the vigilante’s abilities are free, inexhaustible, and largely non-magical. Whereas just about any other class—even heavily specialized ones like those I listed above—would need to cast spells to conceal their identity, thereby risking wasting essential combat resources or running afoul of dispel magic, greater detect magic, antimagic field, etc., vigilantes can comfortably inhabit their roles all day, every day. Third, the mechanical oomph is here. Most new players assume that just because rogues have 8 + Intelligence skill ranks, that must mean that they’re the best at skills—but it’s simply not so. You need depth in Pathfinder, not just breadth, and seamless guise, feign innocence, skill familiarity, etc. all provide the consistency and massive skill bonuses that you need to truly confound even determined searchers or interrogators. Alright: onto the combos.


   * Notorious fool + seamless guise: The classic “Wait, I wasn’t supposed to be in this highly restricted area? Man, the guys down at the temp agency sure pulled one over on me!” talent, notorious fool lets you stealth or steal your way into places and then just pretend like you’re an innocent idiot when you get caught. Pretty funny, even if it’s not as effective as it could be.
   * Seamless shapechanger + malleable flesh + seamless guise: Malleable flesh is a prerequisite for the excellent morphic weaponry vigilante talent, but there are plenty of other reasons you would take it, chief among them this excellent combo. Now, RAW, malleable flesh’s disguise self isn’t called out specifically as a polymorph effect, and therefore not subject to seamless shapechanger’s ability to add your seamless guise bonuses to your Disguise checks. But if malleable flesh is “physical, rather than illusory,” as the rules text state, doesn’t that align much better with the polymorph rules, which tell us that “a polymorph spell transforms your physical body to take on the shape of another creature”? (Emphasis mine.) I dunno. At my table, this would be an open and shut case. And if so, what a powerful combo! Seamless guise grants a +20 circumstance bonus to Disguise; disguise self, a further +10 untyped bonus. Even if your GM rules that the halving from malleable flesh applies to both bonuses, that’s still a cool +15 to appear as any creature you choose—pretty nifty. And that’s without going into malleable flesh’s ability to let you squeeze through cracks! Incredibly useful for getting through keyholes, out of prisons or restraints, etc.
   * Many guises + everyman + any guise: What. A. Talent. Line. What a talent line! The many guises suite initially allows you to assume a totally expendable “burner identity” separate from your social and vigilante identities—one that you can switch at will between various peasants and menials in Golarion society. By the time you reach any guise at 17th level, you can become literally any person (it’s right there on the label, man, I don’t know what to tell you) at will, permanently, non-magically, and with your incredible seamless guise bonuses. If you want to skulk somewhere that a carpenter, cook, mason, chambermaid, gardener, waiter, etc. could go, this is your pick.
   * Hidden magic: Hidden magic is a gem of the social talent list, permitting you to completely conceal any magic items or buffs you may be toting around from casual—and even fairly concerted—scrutiny. Glamered armor and weaponry will set you back only 6,700 gp in total and would permit you to walk, fully armed, past nearly all divination magic looking like a normally clothed person. You would not part an old man from his walking stick?
   * Renown + feign innocence + subjective truth: Hey! Do you want to lie about why you’re somewhere you shouldn’t be extremely effectively? How about permanent innocence and immunity to most lie detection magic? Why, it couldn’t have been me, officer!
   * Another day: This one’s wacky and requires you to take a truly sub-par vigilante talent, but allies can use the another day vigilante talent to beat you into unconsciousness, whereupon you look like you’re dead. Who hasn’t fantasized about doing the whole “I’m a bounty hunter and I just caught your worst enemy!” routine? Heath Ledger’s Joker would be proud.
   * Hide in plain sight: The Stealth skill is normally limited by the fact that you have to have, you know, a topiary or something to hide behind. Not so with HiPS. Now, you are the stealth.
   * Monkey’s paws + leap and bound: Climbing is all well and good, but leap and bound is something else—in essence, it quadruples the results of your Acrobatics checks to jump. With even moderate investment, you can reliably leap about 30 feet into the air by double-digit levels. That’s gotta be useful for something, right?
________________
