# Melee (STR, Sword and Board)

Melee (STR, Sword and Board)


        Sword and shield builds don’t seem to be as popular as two-handed builds in the Pathfinder 1e meta. I can think of a few reasons for that: first, damage is king in high-level Pathfinder play—you either kill an enemy quickly, or they kill you quicker. Two-handed Strength builds do more damage than any other melee playstyle, so it’s QED that you’d want to build for massive damage and cut your opponents down before they get the chance to act. Second, AC (the main selling point of a shield, no?) is one of the least important defensive metrics in Pathfinder at high levels. Enemy attack bonuses scale pretty hard, and there will come a time in most players’ careers when monsters would have to roll exceptionally poorly to miss a hit. Shield bonuses always help, of course, but for the most part you’re better off building for DR, saving throws, miss chances from concealment, etc. than continuing to invest large amounts of gold for 1 or 2 more points of AC. Third, sword and board builds require double the financial investment of two-handed builds. Instead of just enchanting a weapon and armor, you’re now enchanting a weapon, armor, and a shield. Gold spent on those items is gold not spent elsewhere. Finally, if you’re going to actually fight with both a sword and shield, you’re looking at a feat-heavy and attribute-thin build. To retain your shield bonus to AC, you’ll need Improved Shield Bash; if you want to debuff or use combat maneuvers as you shield bash, you might need Stumbling Bash, Toppling Bash, or Shield Slam; Two-Weapon Fighting and its older cousins will be needed to keep your iteratives up to speed; and Shield Master is particularly nice after BAB +11. The TWF feats require Dexterity 15, 17, and 19, respectively, however, which isn’t exactly an easy sell when you’re trying to work in high Strength bonuses.
        Where vigilante sword and board builds get a bit of a boost, though, is from their vigilante talents. They can’t solve any of the first three points above—damage is still king, AC still loses at high levels, and you still have to spend money on a good shield—but they can significantly ease the pain of #4. The most essential vigilante talent to have for these builds is shield of fury. In addition to giving you Improved Shield Bash and Two-Weapon Fighting for free, shield of fury also permits you to ignore the Dexterity requirements of any feat that lists Two-Weapon Fighting as a prerequisite, including Double Slice, Heaven’s Step, Two-Weapon Rend, or anything else you need. To recap: two feats for free and the ability to piledrive all your attribute investment into Strength is a huge benefit. So use it!
        One fun build that I haven’t seen done (but will probably create in the Builds section of this guide) is a build that utilizes Shield Gauntlet Style with shield of fury. Shield Gauntlet Style turns a gauntlet into the equivalent of a buckler, which at 6th level can be used with Two-Weapon Fighting and Improved Shield Bash via shield of fury. Where it really gets fun is the steel soldier vigilante talent + Shielded Gauntlet Master: the former allows you to apply your armor’s enhancement bonus as a weapon enhancement bonus on a gauntlet, and the latter says that any weapon enhancement bonus you have on your gauntlets also counts as a shield enhancement bonus. This neatly solves #3 above, since you’re using the enchantment costs of one piece of equipment (armor) to grant you enhancement bonuses to (effectively) two other pieces of equipment (gauntlet as shield and gauntlet as weapon).
