# Melee (STR/DEX, Natural Weapons)

Melee (STR/DEX, Natural Weapons)


        Natural attack builds aren’t altogether common in Pathfinder outside of specific builds like beastmorph alchemists, but in the correct hands (or talons) they can be devastating. Although natural attacks generally sport smaller damage dice than manufactured weapons and can take both attack and damage penalties if they’re classified as secondary natural attacks, they often have the advantage of coming online faster than BAB-based iterative attacks would progress; moreover, with the addition of the Multiattack feat, you could have a theoretically infinite number of primary and secondary natural attacks, all of which hit at BAB or BAB - 2, ignoring the usual -5/-10/-15 format for iterative attacks.
Practically, these features mean that natural attack builds are incredible for rogue-like classes with high Dexterity scores and sources of precision damage. After all, what do these classes want to do? Full-attack enemies, dealing as much precision damage as possible. How do they do that? Get better battlefield positioning tools; get better ways to proc precision damage; get more attacks; get better attack bonuses on the attacks that they have. What prevents them from doing that? Battlefield positioning and tools to deny enemies Dexterity to AC are widely pursued by these classes, so the rate-limiting factor is generally their ¾ BAB progression, which limits iterative attacks and attack bonuses at the same time. Natural attack builds frontload the number of attacks you can make (three attacks or more are typically available in short order, whereas an iterative attack build would have to wait until 15th level for three attacks) and, per Multiattack, permit your secondary natural attacks to hit at only BAB - 2—and that’s usually on top of any other weapon attacks you may make with your iteratives. A 15th-level stalker vigilante can attack three times with a weapon at +11/+6/+1; a 15th-level stalker vigilante with morphic weaponry and Multiattack can attack three times with a weapon at +11/+6/+1 and an additional four times at +9/+9/+9/+9 with their natural attacks. Who cares what kind of static damage you’re doing with Strength/Dexterity bonuses at that point? If you hit an enemy with a full-attack and proc your hidden strike damage, those extra four attacks will likely be the decisive factor in whether an enemy lives to see the next combat round or gets eviscerated right then and there. Now, individual classes and races don’t typically have a means of acquiring more than one, maybe two natural weapons, but vigilantes have two routes open to them that collectively grant four natural attacks in addition to weapon attacks: the Chu Ye enforcer route and the morphic weaponry route.
        The Chu Ye enforcer route, appropriately enough, involves taking the Chu Ye enforcer archetype. In addition to dumping some strong bonuses to unarmed attacks into your lap, Chu Ye enforcers get access to what is essentially at-will alter self, giant form I, and giant form II. Each of these polymorph spells has forms that grant three natural attacks, plus a helmet gore for a fourth. Polymorph spells are generally pretty good for hybrid natural attack/unarmed strike builds, since amulets of mighty fists meld with your body for the duration of the spell but continue providing their bonuses to attack and damage, unlike manufactured weapons. A scaled fist unchained monk 1 / Chu Ye enforcer stalker vigilante 4 who turns into a lizardfolk berserker can have five attacks by 5th level (flurry of blows made as kicks +4/+4, bite -1, and two claws -1; adding the Multiattack feat improves the bite and claws to +2) which all but assures an enemy’s death if you’re able to land even three of your five. If you don’t like the Chu Ye enforcer route—and it does surrender quite a few vigilante talents, which not everyone may be fond of—the simplest way to flex into natural attacks is through the morphic weaponry route. This one is dead simple: take the malleable flesh vigilante talent, then the morphic weaponry vigilante talent. For a standard stalker build, I’d recommend lethal grace (2nd) → malleable flesh (4th) → morphic weaponry (6th) to pick up your third natural attack right at 6th. You’ll get your final natural attack at 15th level. Assuming you’re attacking with weapons, too, your morphic weapons will all be classified as secondary natural attacks, so be sure to pick up Multiattack to reduce your penalties to -2 instead of -5. Both of these routes add huge damage to stalker vigilantes if you can spare one feat (Multiattack) and either two vigilante talents (malleable flesh + morphic weaponry) or an archetype (Chu Ye enforcer).
