# Melee (DEX, Finesse)

Melee (DEX, Finesse)


        Regardless of how you get there, all finesse builds converge toward a single purpose: to use Dexterity, not Strength, as your attack and damage stat. Done well, this role has plenty of advantages: better Reflex saves and initiative bonuses, comparable AC to more heavily armored builds without the armor check or movement penalties that heavy armor confers, and a wider array of useful skill bonuses, to name just a few. Generally speaking, stalker vigilantes will be much more interested in finesse builds than avenger vigilantes will be, although there’s more cross-pollination (Strength-based stalkers and Dexterity-based avengers) possible in the vigilante class than in other classes. We’ve got three workable routes to build a finesse vigilante: lethal grace, Grace feats, or agile weaponry. Each of them will obviously cost you something, whether feats, vigilante talents, or monetary resources.
        Starting with the simplest, lethal grace builds are stupidly easy to create. Take Weapon Finesse at 1st level so that you’re not using your (likely abysmal) Strength score for your attack bonuses in the first level of a campaign, then grab the lethal grace vigilante talent at 2nd level, retraining Weapon Finesse into whatever feat you like most. Your damage bonus will scale with your vigilante level, and you get to use your Dexterity to attack. Easy peasy. One quirk of lethal grace is that you still use your Strength score for damage, so try not to dump Strength down the toilet at character creation—a 10 is fine, but a 12 or even a 14 is better if you can spare the point buy.
        Another monetarily free (but otherwise costly) option is to get the Weapon Finesse + Weapon Focus + [Weapon] Grace feats. Although not every feat in the [Weapon] Grace category actually has the word “Grace” in the title, it’s a general appellation to refer to feats that allow you to add your Dexterity modifier to damage. The only feats in this category, to the best of my knowledge, include Fencing Grace (rapier), Slashing Grace (any one-handed slashing weapon), Starry Grace (starknife), Dervish Dance (scimitar), and Bladed Brush + Slashing Grace (glaive). If not for the Weapon Focus feat tax or the highly weapon-specific nature of the feats, I’d recommend this route more enthusiastically, but as it is, lethal grace just steals the limelight with its flexibility, ease of use, and scaling damage. Three feats is a big ask in a class that receives no bonus feats.
        Finally, you can always take Weapon Finesse and purchase an agile weapon by sacrificing a +1 from your enhancement bonus. Your list of available weapons diminishes even further here from every Finesse-able weapon (lethal grace) to every weapon of a specific type ([Weapon] Grace) to one specific weapon (agile). It’s there as an option if you need it, and I do believe it’s generally superior to getting [Weapon] Grace, but the lethal grace vigilante talent is still head and shoulders better than agile weaponry.
