# Melee (STR/DEX, Unarmed Strike)

Melee (STR/DEX, Unarmed Strike)


        Curiously enough, unarmed strikes and natural weapons are some of the combat roles that vigilantes do best at, and both Strength and Dexterity routes are eminently achievable thanks to the wonders of vigilante talents. The first question for pretty much any unarmed strike build is, “Could a dip into monk or unchained monk improve what I’ve got here?” The question is non-negligible: a one-level dip into the scaled fist unchained monk archetype gets you +2 Fortitude and Reflex, +1 BAB, Charisma to AC when unarmored, three free feats (Improved Unarmed Strike, Stunning Fist, and your wildcard feat—probably Dragon Style), and the ability to flurry for an extra attack; a two-level dip will get you evasion and another free feat (probably Dodge or Intimidating Prowess). That’s not nothing! Under normal circumstances, you might consider progressing far enough into the monk class (3rd level for core monks; 4th level for unchained monks) to get the still mind class feature, then later branch into the Monastic Legacy feat, don a monk’s robe, and enjoy scaling unarmed strike damage that’s almost as good as a single-class monk’s. Alas, the scaled fist archetype in both classes gives up still mind, so one- or two-level dips are pretty much the rule. Okayo corsair swashbuckler dips can also be worth it if you want to pursue combat feats with high mental stat requirements (lots of style feats and combat maneuver feats require some amount of mental stat investment) but don’t want the hassle of, ya know, actually being intelligent or wise. Right! On to vigilantes themselves.
If you’re going to build an avenger, Strength is probably your best bet. Dragon Style, granted for free with a one-level scaled fist dip, relies on good Strength scores to deal more damage, and it’s far and away the easiest stat to build around for melee combat. Pick up the fist of the avenger vigilante talent and some enchantable handwraps, and voilà! You’ve got a pretty effective unarmed striker right off the bat. It probably won’t deal sickening levels of damage, but it’ll be passable. The less conventional route is to build entirely for Dexterity and Charisma, take the same one-level scaled fist unchained monk dip (or possibly two-level, to score that sweet stalker-exclusive evasion class feature) and pick up the lethal grace vigilante talent. Although you’ll still use Strength as your damage stat, you’ll get to add half your vigilante level to that damage, scaling nicely for free as you grow. If you have the scratch, of course, you’re welcome to just purchase agile handwraps and add your Dexterity modifier to damage without waiting on lethal grace’s scaling. Either works! You’ll have better AC, better Reflex saves, and better initiative, all without a huge hit to damage.
Stalkers do unarmed builds well enough, especially if they follow the Dexterity recipe above; given that every level away from vigilante is a level that they’re not progressing their hidden strike damage, though, it’s a harder sell than for an avenger. I’d still consider a one-level scaled fist unchained monk dip—it’s that good—but without fist of the avenger, you need your hidden strike damage all the more. The teisatsu vigilante archetype unfortunately doesn’t grant access to ninja master tricks, which would permit you to grab unarmed combat mastery, so build an unarmed stalker like you would any other stalker…or look to natural weapons builds, which are where the real sauce is hidden for stalkers.
