# Strategy

Strategy


        I really enjoy the cabalist archetype, but it definitely has some weaknesses that need to be addressed. Most notably, how are you going to deal effective bleed damage with spill blood, and how are you going to perform well as a ⅔ spellcaster? The Cutter is a hybrid approach to both of these questions, creating what is more or less a highly mobile gish that doles out ticking damage over time, wipes enemies out with hard-hitting necromancy debuffs, and uses Intimidate and Use Magic Device for ancillary spellcasting and debuffing. I wouldn’t call the Cutter my most effective build, but it’s definitely making the best of the cabalist archetype, and I’m happy with that build goal.
Regarding out-and-out combat, what cabalists need more than anything else is a reliable method of making enemies lose their Dexterity bonus to AC. Once you can deny Dexterity to AC, you can trigger spill blood for massive bleed damage; once you’ve got bleed damage going, you can trigger bloodbound spell and bloody horror for easy spell save DC boosts and AoE demoralization; once you’ve got an enemy locked down with a debuff and AoE demoralization, the combat is essentially over. But it’s that first element that really sticks in your craw! Making an enemy blind will do it, so relying on necromancy spells like blindness/deafness and wall of blindness/deafness is an easy sell; invisibility and greater invisibility would also do it, although you’d be relying on a teammate’s charity since they’re not naturally on the witch spell list. (At high levels, a staff of stealth is an excellent investment for your tattoo chamber, though.) That leaves mundane means: feinting is possible, especially with the cunning feint vigilante talent, but cabalists are hard-up for vigilante talents and feinting simply doesn’t work well (or at all) against enemies with lower Intelligence scores. That leaves my preferred form factor for vigilante demoralization, Shatter Defenses. With this feat on board, one nonlethal attack with Enforcer will make an enemy shaken or frightened, a second attack will make them flat-footed, and a third will start the blood flowing; the same combo is possible as an AoE with Dazzling Display. In both cases, Signature Skill: Intimidate will help ratchet up the fear conditions to frightened, panicked, and cowering more efficiently.
The main event of the Cutter build is your casting. Cabalists cast off of the witch spell list, which is widely reputed to be one of the strongest in the game for debuffing. Although it’s possible to choose spells from schools other than necromancy, bloodbound spell offers you an effective +2 save DC increase if you use necromantic magic against bleeding enemies. With Spell Focus and Greater Spell Focus, that makes for an effective +4 to save DCs—not too shabby for a ⅔ caster. If you wanted to, you could strip away Enforcer, Signature Skill: Intimidate, and the 15th-level Fiendish Obedience in exchange for feats like Spell Penetration, Greater Spell Penetration, and Persistent Spell, all of which would expand your debuffing capacities. Otherwise, you’ll likely rely on persistent metamagic rods held in your tattoo chamber (or a spare hand, if your GM rules against the tattoo chamber interpretation) to accomplish the same goal. Some good necromancy school chestnuts on the witch spell list:


      1. Ray of enfeeblement
      2. Blindness/deafness, boneshaker
      3. Accursed glare, bestow curse, calamitous flailing, curse of befouled fortune, howling agony, ray of exhaustion, siphon might
      4. Conditional curse, enervation, fear, masochistic shadow, purge spirit, riding possession, wall of blindness/deafness
      5. Magic jar, major curse, possession, wracking ray
      6. Flesh wall, unwilling shield, wither limb


At very high levels, there’s one more bit of nonsense that was too thematic not to mention: it turns out that the Cutter is a worshiper of Shax, the demon lord patron of blood, murder, lies, serial killers, and other unsavory things. Some of the demon lords have hideously powerful Fiendish Obedience boons, and Shax is no exception. Fiendish Obedience + Damned Soldier (take that one at 17th level) allows you to pick between the exalted / sentinel boons at each tier. For your Tier 1 at 12th level, you’ll take the sentinel’s spell-like abilities, which include 3/day divine favor, 2/day instrument of agony, or 1/day haste, all of which are great gets already. I personally prefer the sentinel’s Tier 2, unholy butcher, since the updated Book of the Damned significantly toned down life in blood—see if you can spot the difference between Demonic Obedience and Fiendish Obedience. Anyway, unholy butcher is likely to grant you huge profane bonuses to your AC and saves, which anyone can appreciate. The star of the show, however, is unquestionably whatever you pick as your Tier 3—and let me tell you, picking at 20th level would be a real wrench. Murderer’s wrath, the Tier 3 exalted power, just hands you 5d6+10 sneak attack damage on every attack and says, “Go nuts.” Ten free levels of rogue and then some? Sure, why not? My personal pick for this build would be the sentinel’s Tier 3, bloodbath: whenever a creature within 15 feet of you bleeds, you get that bleed damage back as healing. Moreover, you add your Charisma modifier to any bleed damage you deal from other abilities, including…yep, you guessed it, the cabalist’s spill blood class feature. So that’s vigilante level + Charisma modifier in bleed damage to every enemy who gets hit by your dagger, and you get healed for all of it. With two or three enemies to fuel bloodbath, you’re practically impervious to death by HP damage. It’s a 20th-level pie-in-the-sky build, but can’t a lad have a dream?
________________
Back Matter


        Well, my friends, all good journeys must come to their eventual end. It has been my great pleasure to walk through the vigilante class with you. If youʼd like to send words of encouragement or constructive criticism, feel free to shout out at me on Reddit. As always, thanks goes out to the incredible Pathfinder community, without whose guides and formatting tips I would have been hopelessly lost, and to Paizo itself, which has created a truly wonderful game that makes for some truly times. Hereʼs to many more years in Pathfinder 2nd Edition. May your name always taste like fear on the tongues of your foes!


All my best,
Chris (/u/Allerseelen)
