# Tanking Hits

Tanking Hits


        As a martial class, vigilantes don’t have a huge variety of avenues open to them to actively tank hits and stay on their feet under sustained fire. Moreover, even avenger vigilantes are a full-BAB d8 HD class, making them squishier than other full-BAB martials. What this means practically is that you’re going to have to rely mostly on passive bonuses from items or a select few vigilante talents (shield of blades, primarily) to buff your AC. Save buffs are again scant, but companion to the lonely or steely resolve can both work in a pinch, and dips such as scaled fist unchained monk 1 or paladin/antipaladin 2 can go a long way toward shoring up both saves and AC. Unfortunately, acquiring DR, spell resistance, miss chances through concealment, etc. are all out of the question unless you take a spellcasting archetype. As a mostly martial class, you either need Use Magic Device or support from a third party to leverage more exotic forms of defense.
        One element that I feel doesn’t receive enough attention for stalker vigilantes is that they begin the game proficient with medium armor, and can take the armor skin vigilante talent to eliminate both the speed penalty as well as the armor check penalties to every skill they might reasonably need to fulfill their role as a roguelike (i.e., Acrobatics, Escape Artist, and Stealth). Thus, while lightly armored, Dexterity-based stalkers are every bit as iconic as lightly armored, Dexterity-based rogues, you can also build a Strength-based stalker pretty easily, taking the Heavy Armor Proficiency feat (or heavy training vigilante talent) at later levels and wearing mithral full plate, which counts as medium armor for every purpose except whether you’re proficient with it. This improves damage output and makes you less reliant on your hidden strike dice than you would have been otherwise.
