# The Overview

The Overview


The somewhat cheeky answer to the above question is that vigilantes are simply rogues…as they should have been. And that’s partially true! Stalker vigilantes, especially those with the teisatsu archetype, combine the best elements of the rogue and ninja classes while benefiting from almost a decade of design experience that Paizo had acquired at that point. Freed from some of the traditional constraints of 3.5e roguery and given a buffet of optional class features in the form of social/vigilante talents, it turns out that the class is quite potent! Focusing solely on stalkers ignores avengers, however, who play much more like fighters or slayers than they do like rogues. Rather than point at any specific role or mechanical niche that the vigilante class fills, it’s perhaps most accurate to say that versatility is the theme of the vigilante: while every vigilante will be better at social interaction, infiltration, and espionage than your average Pathfinder class (thanks entirely to the strength of their social talents) their combat roles are many, varied, and unique as fingerprints. They’re neither as powerful as fighters nor as ridiculously flexible as brawlers, yet manage to compete favorably with both classes while retaining significantly more utility and skill outside of combat. Moreover, they have a number of archetypes that radically redefine what the class does, typically through the addition of spellcasting. The hunter, inquisitor, unchained summoner, witch, and wizard spell lists are all available among the vigilante archetypes, so there’s no need to think of it as a purely martial class if you don’t wish to.
