# The Chassis

The Chassis


d8 Hit Die: Vigilantes feel in many respects like spiritual successors to rogues, and as a mostly non-magical striker class, that means that they get a d8 HD. Interestingly, this design decision also extends to avenger vigilantes, making that particular vigilante specialization almost unique in the Pathfinder universe as a d8 HD class with full BAB. (The only other exception that I know of is the trappings of the warrior occultist.) Although a d8 is certainly better than a d6, vigilantes will not hold up under sustained fire as well as other d10 martial classes, so try to get your hits in and then fade back into a protected position whenever you can—being too brave will get you killed.


¾ BAB Progression or Full BAB Progression: Aha, I bet you didn’t see that coming! Or maybe you did, if you’re familiar with the vigilante class even slightly. Vigilantes choose one of two specializations when they start the game: avenger or stalker. Avenger vigilantes receive full BAB progression and their own set of in-your-face combat talents; stalker vigilantes remain a ¾-BAB class with a pool of precision damage dice, similar to rogues with sneak attack, and have their own set of sneaky-stabby talents. Many archetypes trade away vigilante specialization, however, in which case you count as neither an avenger nor a stalker. In these cases, you’ll have ¾ BAB and qualify neither for avenger nor for stalker talents. Archetypes usually have their own sets of talents that they want you to consider anyway.


Skills: Vigilantes receive a generous 6 + Intelligence modifier skill ranks per level, which is on par with most other dedicated skill monkeys in the game, including bards and investigators. Unless your GM is very lenient with point buy, however, you may need to dump Intelligence to accommodate higher Charisma, Wisdom, and Constitution scores; the average vigilante may end up with only 5 skill ranks per level. If your group hasn’t investigated the Background Skills ruleset, I highly recommend you do so, because most classes thrive when they’re able to build in more and more of the flavor that less-optimal skills afford. The skills available to you are detailed below—if it’s italicized, that means that it’s a class skill, conferring a permanent +3 bonus the first time you put a rank in it.


* Perception: Just because you’re a Charisma-based class, did you think you could get away without maximal investment in Perception? Hardly, mes amis, hardly. Without a doubt, Perception is the most important skill in Pathfinder, determining everything from your participation in surprise rounds to your ability to spot loot, traps, and secret doors. How are you going to become vengeance incarnate if you can’t even spot that thug creeping up on you in a dark alley? See, this is how Thomas Wayne died: failed Perception check. Look it up. It’s canon.
* Bluff, Diplomacy, Intimidate, Sense Motive: Which Pathfinder class is mechanically scariest? It’s probably down to either the inquisitor or the vigilante, but on balance (as much as I hate to break with my pro-inquisitor bias) I think the blue ribbon goes to the vigilante. Charisma-based, instead of Wisdom-based; packed with social talents that can improve your Intimidate score and class features that take advantage of scared enemies; designed narratively to strike fear into the hearts of ne’er-do-wells everywhere. Vigilantes will often be expected to be the party face, so gear up, buttercup.
* Disguise: Huh? Disguise rated blue? What’s that all about? Well, when you play a vigilante, you’re not playing one character, you’re technically playing two—and Disguise is how you sidestep a scenario in which those alter egos merge in the public eye. Sure, seamless guise gives you enormous bonuses to prevent anyone from identifying the mild-mannered billionaire Lance Hunt as Captain Amazing, but if you ever need to fight someone or use vigilante talents while in your social identity, you’re going to be incredibly happy that you invested in Disguise. Many guises and other infiltration playstyles will demand maximum investment in Disguise, as well. If you’re playing Iron Man and don’t particularly value the secrecy of your vigilante/social identities, you can dump it.
* Stealth: We all get that grim, silent defenders of justice and liberty are supposed to be stealthy, yes? I don’t need to hammer that point home? Good. Avengers can probably get away with little to no investment in Stealth, since their heavier armor will make them poor at it anyway without the armor skin vigilante talent, but stalkers must absolutely max out ranks here.
* Use Magic Device: Use Magic Device is widely regarded as one of the strongest, most versatile skills in the game because of it allows you to use wands, scrolls, etc. from different classes or even pretend to be a different race, class, alignment, etc. for the purposes of wondrous items. As a Charisma-based class, vigilantes are well-positioned to fool magic items into working for them through sheer force of personality, and with the skill familiarity social talent, they can even take 10 on UMD checks so that they never accidentally fail to activate an item.
* Acrobatics, Escape Artist: While avenger vigilantes can deal with opposed CMB checks and use heavy armor to tank movement-based attacks of opportunity a bit more comfortably, stalkers will absolutely need mechanisms for escaping grapples and avoiding stray hits. Acrobatics and Escape Artist are those mechanisms.
* Disable Device: Vigilantes are generally a rogue-like class, built for infiltration and covert operations. And you’re never going to pass Infiltration 101 if you can’t make it past an average padlock, are you? Gotta graduate from Vigilante College so your dead parents aren’t disappointed in you.
* Knowledge (Arcana, Dungeoneering, Nature, Local, Planes, Religion): Knowledge skills are never wasted skill ranks; vigilantes aren’t ideally suited to making them a primary focus, however—Intelligence is likely to be a dump stat, and your list of class skills would require serious effort to change around. The ancestral enlightenment and well-known expert talents (in conjunction with the aid another action) are probably a good middle ground to shoot for if you want to contribute to Knowledge skill checks.
* Climb, Fly, Swim: Some early ranks here may be merited in order to prevent you from plummeting to your death or drowning, but neither is relevant in the long term, especially if you’re in an archetype that confers some measure of spellcasting ability on you.
* Heal: Heal always has some benefits for any class, but with no Wisdom focus and no class skill, it would be a tough trek.
* Linguistics: The king of the background skills! Linguistics grants more languages as you pump more ranks into it, so it’s one of the few background skills that has immediate, demonstrable benefits to a character. Definitely use one of your two background skill ranks on Linguistics if you’re playing with that ruleset.
* Profession: Profession skills are probably among the better background skills you could have, since Paizo APs often go to some lengths to include Profession checks as alternatives to Knowledge or social skill checks. Not a priority if you’re not playing with background skills, though.
* Spellcraft: As much as I’d love for vigilantes to be great at Spellcraft, that would be a kinder world than the one we live in. With Intelligence as a likely dump stat and no class skill, vigilantes would be fighting an uphill battle to identify spells and the properties of magical items.
* Survival: Survival is more useful than a lot of people give it credit for. If you want to become better at tracking or are playing in a wilderness-heavy game, this is going to be one to consider more strongly.
* Appraise: Of no real mechanical use to vigilantes except as a one-rank background skill.
* Craft: Between the in vogue and double time social talents, vigilantes can actually become weirdly good at mundane crafting, but it’s almost never an optimal build choice.
* Handle Animal, Ride: You’ll know if you’re playing an archetype that needs these skills (mounted fury, e.g.). For most vigilantes, they’re wasted skill ranks.
* Knowledge (Engineering, Geography, History, Nobility): Very, very niche skill checks, and with no innate class skill support, you’re probably better off leaving these to someone else in the party. Engineering and Nobility can both get one rank if you’re playing with Background Skills—to proc ancestral enlightenment, if nothing else.
* Perform: Perhaps useful for a bard gestalt or variant multiclass, but not generally needed.
* Sleight of Hand: Not really necessary unless you plan to be planting evidence on someone.


Armor Proficiencies: Light armor, medium armor, and shields. Pretty good! Dedicated Strength builds will probably go with an avenger specialization, which then unlocks talents like heavy training and armor skin. Dips are also possible to nab heavy armor proficiency, but as a whole the vigilante class is pretty opposed to dips—anything you need, you can get out of a vigilante talent, and you only get those if you stick around in the class.


Weapon Proficiencies: Full simple and martial weapon proficiency certainly gives the vigilante an edge over the rogue! If you want to wield a greatsword, kukri, etc., you’ll appreciate having martial weapon proficiency right off the bat.


Good Reflex and Will saves, Bad Fortitude save: I consider the strong Reflex/Will save progression to be the second best in the game after strong Fortitude/Will. Wherever you stand on the issue, everyone can agree that strong Will saves are by far the most important to have. Fortitude can be compensated for fairly easily, both by boosting your Constitution score at point buy or else by taking the Great Fortitude feat later in the game. A number of spells from allies (delay disease, delay poison, death ward, etc.) can also help bolster you against specific types of Fortitude saves.


Attribute Allocation: Vigilantes are dependent on a bunch of attributes—MAD as all get-out. Strength-based combat builds will probably go for something like Strength > Constitution, Dexterity > Charisma, Wisdom > Intelligence, using the armor skin vigilante and heavy training vigilante talents to keep AC high even with modest Dexterity scores. Dexterity-based builds that use the lethal grace vigilante talent will still be incentivized to retain positive Strength modifiers, which reshuffles the normal priorities for normal Dexterity-based builds: Dexterity > Constitution, Charisma > Strength, Wisdom > Intelligence.
