# Using Skills

Using Skills


        Vigilantes of all stripes, whether avenger or stalker, have huge advantages outside of combat. They receive 6 + Intelligence skill ranks per level, which places them on par with inquisitors, bards, investigators, and other skill monkeys in the the 1e universe. But even though other classes get plenty of ways to improve their skill checks (the inquisitor’s stern gaze, the investigator’s inspiration, etc.) or consolidate their skill ranks (the bard’s versatile performance), it’s not common for them to be introduced to completely different ways to use their skills. Not so for the vigilante, whose social talents are often entire mechanical subsystems on their own: sure, the renown talent line will get you some bonuses to Intimidate, but it also unlocks loyal minions, a Batcave of your very own, discounts at stores, and much more; Disguise may be a strength for the class, but it’s not until the many guises talent line enables you to become anyone at any time that you start to think, “Huh! Maybe there’s really something here.”
        As a heavily Charisma-based class, vigilantes excel in all the areas you would normally expect: Intimidate builds are ludicrously easy to build with frightening appearance, the renown social talent, Dazzling Display, and Signature Skill: Intimidate; likewise, Bluff and Diplomacy are predictable strengths. Once the skill familiarity social talent comes online at 9th level, it’s almost too easy to build for Use Magic Device, as the primary downside of that skill is that you need consistent skill check results to activate wands, scrolls, etc. in combat. With the ability to take 10, even when threatened or rushed, using spell trigger and spell completion items becomes as easy as drawing breath. There are some bonuses out there for Knowledge skills (ancestral enlightenment) and Craft or Profession for mundane item creation (double time, social grace, in vogue, etc.), but the vigilante’s apex of power is found—by a country mile—in Disguise. 
“Disguise?” I hear you ask. “Isn’t that almost always a suboptimal skill choice?” Yep. It sure is. But the keyword is almost, and vigilantes are most certainly the exception to the rule. Thanks in large part to the many guises social talent line, the hidden magic social talent, and your own innate seamless guise bonuses, vigilantes are better suited than just about any class in the game to perform deep-cover infiltrations of enemy organizations. Most classes that focus on infiltration (some inquisitor or bard archetypes, e.g.) require spells or spell-like abilities to inhabit their role fully. Although that may not be a problem in some circumstances, any well-provisioned organization is going to have spellcasters using divination magic to check for imposters, and should a stray greater dispel magic come your way, well, it could be all over but the crying. Vigilantes, on the other hand, accomplish their missions almost entirely non-magically: dual identity, seamless guise, many guises, everyman, any guise, hidden magic, etc. are all extraordinary abilities, meaning that no amount of magical scrutiny will reveal that you’re not who and what you say you are. Pair that with the vigilante’s ability to improve Disguise/Bluff scores and hit skill checks so consistently (thanks to skill familiarity), and it’s not likely that you’ll be found out unless you’re really in the wrong place at the wrong time or fumble your roleplay. The autonomy and longevity of the vigilante’s infiltration abilities are real strengths of the class—so use them!
