# Feats

Feats
So like all sections, I will not be going over EVERY feat in pathfinder and really not even every feat the sorcerer gets access to. I will primary focus on feats that I think either give you unique abilities, new and powerful options, or are common enough in sorcerer/arcane/spontaneous builds to be worth talking about.
General Feats
                                 * (5/5) Versatile Spontaneity: Congrats, you are now a prepared caster. Prepare one that is on your list from a written source, be it a scroll, or a spellbook. If you do it from a scroll, the scroll is expended. If you do it from a spellbook it is not. It uses a spell slot one higher than its actual level and it takes 10 minutes per spell level to prepare...AND ITS STILL FUCKING AMAZING. Getting to have a spellbook of spells that you can search through when your (hopefully) well crafted list doesn’t help is huge. On it’s own this is great, but when combined with things like Paragon Surge, and the Mnemonic Vestments, you start to get a sorcerer that can have ANYTHING they need WHENEVER they need it.
                                 * Preconstructed Spellbooks that you can totally just buy and are worth every copper.
                                 * (5/5) Planned Spontaneity: You can now multi prep spells into single spell slots, thus raising your versatility even further! And the not highest spell thing doesn’t really matter because they are already going to be a spell slot up.
                                 * (5/5) Magical Epiphany: Once per day, prep one spell slot as a standard action. Nice! With planned spontaneity, enjoy walking into a fight, pulling out a spell book and double prepping whatever you need instantly.
                                 * (5/5) Emergency Attunement: Honestly, I didn’t know this feat existed until I made this guide but holy moley. This makes otherwise situational spells really adaptable, as you just need to make a baby spellcraft check and can just...switch it. This makes you even more versatile, and we love that. Spell immunity? Swap that. Paragon Surge Spells? Swap That. Resist energy? SWAP THAT. Amazing feat that makes our spells better at the cost of duration...which is pretty easy to get a lot of. 
                                 * (5/5) Experimental Spellcaster: Get access to a little bit of wordcasting. You get all Target words, the boost metaword and one effect word of any level you can cast. While this system has not gotten the love it should have, there are some DEFINITE stand out amazing words that can change the game. Moreover, there are lesser spells that can be “boosted” into greater spells, meaning you get two spells known for the price of one!
                                 * (5/5) Aberrant Tumor: Aberrant bloodline gets a tumor familiar! These are...gross but they can basically hide in your body. Definitely worth picking up as again, familiars are great.
                                 * (4/5)* False Focus: OKAY THIS IS IT. This is what eschew materials SHOULD be. Burn 100gp on a symbol and never have to pay for any spell that costs less than that again. Now this is only good if your DM ya know...cares about this sort of thing for anything short of a diamond. Also, again...Alchemical Reagents are dope.
                                 * (4/5) Irrisen Icemage: For some reason, a Sorcerer only feat. All of your non-ice spells are weaker and your ice spells are stronger. Three times per day, turn non ice spells into ice spells. This can be really good if you are trying to make a winter blaster, and doesnt increase the level of the spell like the Elemental Metamagic would, in exchange for only letting you do cold.
                                 * (6/5) Leadership: Our first 6/5 feat. Why? Because for a feat at level 7, you get ANOTHER CHARACTER SHEET. This is far and away the strongest feat in all of pathfinder...and it barely has any prerequisites. If your DM allows this, it’s objectively the best option.
                                 * (3/5) Chill Amplification: Targets hit with cold damage can’t make 5-foot steps and have their speed reduced by 5. This may not sound like much, but this can keep larger fighters from getting in your face, or keep people from from getting out of your fighters face.
                                 * (4/5) Expanded Arcana: Gives you one spell known of highest level or two of less than highest level. I for one would always say go for the second option, just a better bang for your buck. That said, MORE SPELLS KNOWN IS ALWAYS GREAT. This is an amazing feat if you are feeling cramped or just want to round yourself out a little bit and don’t have anything else to take. It’s probably BEST if you...I dunno...had a way of picking it up temporarily multiple times and changing which spells you get...but that's not like...possible...haha...
                                 * (5/5)* Augment Calling: Okay this is only for calling builds but getting an extra 2 HD can be HUGE, giving you access to creatures that would be otherwise impossible to bind, like Balors or Pit Fiends. Obviously skip if you aren’t into planar binding like that, but if you are, even a little, this is a MUST HAVE.
                                 * (3-5/5)* Dead Inside: Whatever for most sorcerers but INCREDIBLY important for psychic sorcerers who will lose the ability to cast if they are under emotional effects. If you have psychic casting this is amazing and will save you from the DM’s Wrath
                                 * (4/5) Gifted Mesmerist: Get one of your charm/compulsion spells as an SLA, trade it out later. Can definitely help add a bit of versatility, and as you level up, you can keep switching out the SLA for higher and higher level spells, which is nice.
                                 * (3/5) Heavenly Radiance: Aasimar Only. Burn a use of Daylight SLA to use a better spell like ability. I’d say wait until you can at least get searing light. Nice way for a Sorcerer to get access to a few cleric abilities without ya know...getting access to all of them.
                                 * (3/5) Ordered Mind: Higher DC for the skill check but now you can now dispel using any spell of the same school so long as its the same level or higher. Since you are going to have spells from EVERY school more or less, this should make it easier since you can cast whatever whenever. That said….counterspelling still ain’t great.
                                 * (4/5) Improved Initiative: Going first is amazing! It’s a pretty solid bonus.
                                 * (4/5) Noble Scion (Scion of War): Remember, we want to get Charisma to as many things as we can. Initiative is going first, and going first is winning first. If you are able to get this and AC switched over to charisma, you really don’t need dex for much of anything.
                                 * (3/5) Toughness: Look it’s not complex, but it helps. You don’t have a lot of health and so having more, even just one per level, is nice.
                                 * (2/5) Exotic Heritage or (3/5) Skill Focus / Eldritch Heritage / Improved Eldritch Heritage / Greater Eldritch Heritage: So this lets us snap powers from other bloodlines. But don’t we already have a bloodline? Well yeah but no reason you can’t have two. Besides, there are some bloodlines, especially wildblooded, that get some really cool first level powers. Like Sylvan for example, which just gives you an animal companion. Tha said, I can't really rate these because they depend on their bloodline.
                                 * (5/5) Magic Trick: So you should definitely not think of magic trick as one feat but rather a collection of feats that all augment different spells, giving you more spell options. Each spell has its own set of tricks, and so long as you meet the pre-reqs, they are all open to you, and can COMPLETELY change how you interact with said spells. While I have to rate each trick list independently, as a sorcerer, simply taking a feat that makes one of our spells known is much more valuable and viable is incredibly useful. I’ll list my favorites below, as per usual:
                                 * Fireball: You know it, you love it, its fireball. So why is this purple? Well because if you use the cluster bomb trick, you half the radius in exchange for removing the dice cap...without raising the level of the spell. That’s insanely powerful and that’s just one trick. If you combine it with concentrated fire, each individual fireball goes from being 2d6 to 3d6, which is basically the same as empower, but instead it basically becomes a single target attack...which ya know, is still really ouch. If you get a Rod of Widen Metamagic, this can get even more nutty. Sculpt flames also makes it so that you never have to worry about hitting your friends again. So...yeah just make sure to put points into spellcraft (which you should be doing anyway) and get Selective Spell.
                                 * Floating Disk: Beyond looking super cool and being integral for playing as this guy, being able to have a pseudo fly just for having ranks in fly is really good, as a lot of low level problems can be solved by flying. Ask your dm if this will let you fly up walls or across ceilings, for extra radness. OH and don’t forget...this lasts HOURS per level.
                                 * Obscuring Mist: Great battlefield control spell gets more options. If you have the extend feat (which isnt a bad idea at all) you can make mist cling to people giving your allies total concealment. Combine this with Mist Screen and you can basically blind the entire enemy situation without much effort. 
                                 * Shield: Spend an immediate action to turn your shield spell into a tiny wall of force, allowing you to block spells, or attacks from one angle. This CAN be a life saver, but otherwise is just okay.
                                 * (3/5) Sorcerous Bloodstrike: Once per day, kill a dude, get one of your tricks back. Since it’s only once per day I can only rate it so highly.
                                 * (3/5) Spell Focus / (3/5) Greater Spell Focus: Okay I’m going to let you all in on a little secret...I don’t think spell focus is a good feat…..ON its own. On it’s own it raises the DC’s for spells of a specific school by 1, which is effectively the same as weapon focus, BUT we also have to contend with spell resistance. On it’s own, I don’t think spell focus is worth you time. Where it shines however, is in combination with other feats and abilities. Blood Havoc needs spell focus. If you already have another way of pumping DC’s, like a kitsune enchantress? Spell focus. So I’d rarely suggest taking it on it’s own but at times, this is your point blank shot, or weapon focus...you just gotta to get to the good stuff.
                                 * (1/5) Deceitful / (4/5) Cunning Caster: Just like knowing things is useful, having your enemies not know things is also very useful. That saiiiiid deceitful is a trash feat, so I can’t recommend the tax lightly. Only do this if you have a whole build around it.
                                 * (4/5) Spell Penetration / (4/5) Greater Spell Penetration: So these are basically late game feat taxes depending on how you play, each offering a +2 bonus on all spell resistance checks. Which again...suck and we hate them.
                                 * (4/5) Knowledgeable Spellcaster: Okay so this one is hilariously powerful because in exchange for a knowledge roll, you can get +3 to overcoming SR and then when you have 10 ranks, its +5. That beasts out and stacks with spell penetration and all you have to do is be decent at knowing things. 1000% worth it.
Combat Feats
                                 * (3/5) Arcane Strike: As a swift action, do a bit more damage. It’s again, one of the few scaling bonuses to damage, so we like it for that, but its for weapons...and if you are using a weapon I am concerned. If you aren’t using a weapon please don’t.
                                 *  (5/5) Spell Cartridge / (4/5) Infused Spell Cartridge: Did you want spell bullets? This is how you get spell bullets. Spell cartige is AMAZING because it takes out the need to reload, which is what holds a lot of firearms back from being amazing. Infused basically gives you a ranged spellstrike-lite, which we might actually be able to use, but it involves a lot of feats.
                                 * (2/5) Raging Blood / (4/5) Blooded Arcane Strike: You no longer have to use a swift action to activate arcane strike, but will likely need to take the Mad Magic feat in order to ya know, use your main class feature.


Item Creation Feats
                                 * (5/5) Craft Wondrous Item: If you are going to get a feat, and you don’t know which to pick? Pick this one. This has one of the widest array of items, they are always helpful, AND you can ignore a lot of the pre-reqs so long as your skill checks are high enough.
                                 * (6/5) Craft Fleshcrafting Poison: Stealing monster abilities is busted, and if you get away with this, then be grateful or very afraid of your GM. It is part of my uh recycle mage build
                                 * (4/5) Craft Arms and Armor: So on its own it’s really good...for your team. Don’t get me wrong, there is armor you can wear and this will come in handy for that but in general, this will be a lot more useful for your party than for yourself.
                                 * (5-6/5) Craft Construct: So these can actually be SILLY powerful if you know how to use them. Constructs have some of the wildest cheese, from the Tiny God Homunculi to the Painter Wizard, this can get REALLY busted REALLY fast if your DM isn't paying attention.
                                 * Also never forget: “Once the crafting process is complete, the resulting construct is ready to receive orders. A construct recognizes its creator intuitively and obeys all commands issued to it by that individual.”
                                 * (5/5) Inscribe Magical Tattoo: Basically allows you to make a second set of magical items but at a much higher cost. This is important because it lets you have two items in one slot...also come on, sexy super magic tattoo’s? That’s sorceror as fuck.
                                 * (3/5) Scribe Scroll: Lets you make scrolls of your spell list, and honestly? You have so many ways of abusing scrolls, you might as well pick it up. That said, without some cheese you generally won’t be as good as the wizard at this one.
                                 * (6/5) Creating Magical Traps*: So technically this isn’t a magic item creation feat, and doesn’t really require a feat but these are basically in the same ballpark so I just wanted to let you know, magical traps are busted, expensive but busted, especially with automatic resets. You can basically have contingency whatever, and place multiple spells on one trap and so long as you can cast it, it’s gucci so just...yeah no this is dumb.
Metamagic Feats
                                 * (6/5) Sacred Geometry: Free metamagic. FREE METAMAGIC. Combined with the right metamagic feats, this ability is downright godly, the qualifications are dirt easy and you can make every spell unstoppable. Why don’t most people take it? Well all of that horrible math of course! If only someone had made an online easily accessible and useful calculator...hint...hint!
                                 * (5/5) Spell Perfection: More free metamagic! Very late game, but its incredibly useful, and all that it asks from you is that you take more metamagic! Can do!!! (Also remember that it doubles ANY other feat based numerical bonuses. Caster level, DC, anything.) This is the capstone for any blaster
                                 * (2-6/5) Ascendant Spell: Okay so basically, ascendant spell lets you cast a spell as its MYTHIC version which is...completely ridiculous. All mythic spells are just straight up better versions of the base spell, and getting access to them in non mythic games is great...or it would be if it didnt bring you up +5 spell levels. Damn. If only we had a way, that was relatively easy, to be able to use metamagic without raising the actual level of the spell! Then well this would be amazing wouldn’t it? Probably busted.
                                 * (5/5) Cherry Blossom Spell: If a target takes damage from a spell (even if they succeed their save) They take 2 ABILITY DAMAGE to either all their mental or physical scores. So long as your spell has a save, they don't get a fort save to negate it. Even for +3 spell levels, this is probably worth it. Imagine if we didn’t have to do that?
                                 * (4/5) Extend Spell: Doubles your duration. Short sweet, gets the job done, great for long term buffs or other effects. Definitely worth picking up.
                                 * (5/5) Quickened Spell: You are probably going to get a rod of this, because its sort of expensive BUT action economy is the name of the game. Being able to cast two spells in one round is ridiculously powerful, don’t forget it.
                                 * (4/5) Dazing Spell: HAHAHA IF THEY TAKE DAMAGE FROM THE SPELL THEY ARE DAZED. DAZED. Dazed creatures can take no actions, completely removing potentially dozens of enemies from the board. Dazing fireball is classic for a reason, and honestly this is one of the best debuff tools in the game. Fucking terrifying.
                                 * (4/5) Rime Spell: Ice spells entangle. Good cute debuff and you have plenty of ice spells.
                                 * (3/5) Heighten Spell: Usually, whatever, just makes a spell count as a higher level than it is. Gives you some extra DC’s. Not great...unless you are getting into Angel Summoner Cheese, in which case, it’s necessary.
                                 * (5/5) Studied Metamagic: Make a knowledge check. If you pass, you completely ignore the targets energy resistances or DR from its race...which is what most monsters have. Better for the wizard I think, but still great on you. BLASTERS, THIS IS FOR YOU.
                                 * (4/5) Empowered Spell: All variable numerical effects...ALL OF THEM are increased by 1.5. All of them. Thats damage dice, possibly creatures affected for some spells. It just says it all. Go off I guess. Blasters, you are also taking this.
                                 * (4/5) Maximized Spell: All variable numeric effects are maximized. Healing is maxed, damage is maxed yadda yadda.
                                 * (4/5) Intensified Spell: Raises the number of possible damage dice by 5. An important note is that it doesn’t increase your caster level, so if you dont have enough CL to use all of those dice it’s a waste BUT its a great way of getting more dice, and making weaker spells continuously frightening. There is a reason this is the magus staple.
                                 * (5/5) Persistent Spell: Effectively roll twice and take the lowest for all saves involved with the spell. For a lot of later game spells, it’s save or be absolutely destroyed, so this can be an INCREDIBLY useful power to have. Incredibly. Very very worth picking up mid to late game.
                                 * (4.5/5) Piercing Spell: Hey do you know that SR is the worst? Like the absolute worst? This makes your enemies SR count as being 5 lower and only raises your spell level by 1. This can and will save your ass at least once so it’s a good pick up...possibly better as a rod, but a good pickup nonetheless.
                                 * (4/5) Reach Spell: There are a SURPRISING number of incredibly powerful touch spells, and while ya know, most of them you can deal with via spectral hand, once you get to level 10 or so you’ll definitely want to be able to cast some of your 5th or 6th level spells at a a range.


Monster Feats*
*So these feats are just a nice pick up if you have room and make some sorc bloodline abilities really good...Also if any DM says that players cannot choose monster feats as per RAW, that is incorrect. Craft Construct is listed as a monster feat...and players can totally take that. It’s just uncommon that players meet the pre-reqs. That said, an argument can be made as to whether SLA’s that don’t duplicate specific spells qualify...so ask nicely.
                                 * (5/5) Quickened Spell-Like Ability: Three times per day, cast an SLA as a swift action. So you basically just choose something to do a bit faster, which helps some of your standard action SLA’s not interrupt the flow of battle.
                                 * (5/5) Reach Spell-Like Ability: Increase the range of your SLA! Rules are a little complicated but it makes a lot of your first level touch abilities much more viable.
                                 * (4/5) Intensified Spell-Like Ability: Three times per day, add 5 dice to whatever SLA. Make bad rays slightly less bad! Make a big attack more damage!!! 
                                 * (4/5) Empower Spell-Like Ability: Three times per day, you can increase numbers by 50%. Woo!!!!
                                 * (?/5) Planar Heritage (Nabasu): On its own, planar heritage, like racial heritage, is a bit of a nothing feat that just gets you access to another race so that you technically count for the sake of pre-reqs. It’s only as good as what you get from it. So what do we get from it?
                                 * (5/5) Demonic Possession / (6/5) Improved Possession: Okay getting access to a pretty powerful spell as an SLA at level 1 is really good, and has very little requirements. That's fantastic. Getting access to 24 hour complete control over a creature's entire stat block is busted and if your DM allows this...be grateful.
