# Roles

Non-Combat Roles
The fighter is a class that focuses primarily on combat, so when deciding what you want your out of combat role to be, you must be considerate of the fact that it will require building and investing your attributes, skills, and feats in certain ways. Generally speaking, the fighter is “the weapons and armor guy” and all fighters are going to be played in a similar manner in regards to whether or not they value coin or equipment as far as spoils of adventuring go. How you choose to invest your best mental stats will affect your build and ideally your personality as well, which would affect your choices in making the best fighter for you. Normally, none of these rolls are intended to dump WIS, as it is an important defensive stat, and these were written with the presumption that you won’t want it to be your dump stat, meaning you will dump either INT or CHA, should you dump anything; regardless, the stats with the (-) in front of them represent the overall reliability of the skills which use the associated attribute in that particular role.
 
The Strong Silent Type (+WIS -CHA): CHA based skills are more or less not your best option, so invest into things that benefit WIS like Perception, Profession, or Sense Motive. Dumping CHA means INT won’t generally be negative and you will have more skills to invest into choices. Your character won’t be doing a lot of the talking, so more skills based on adventuring will be common, and if you want to use intimidation you will need to spend more resources to be effective.
 
The Soft Spoken Guy (+WIS -INT): INT based options can be very useful, but not essential in your chosen role. Being able to have a strong mental defense can help against what you face and having better awareness in your skills is never bad. This also is the most friendly for maintaining a strong WIS and having CHA based skills like intimidate, diplomacy, or UMD. You will end up spending more feat resources on skills than other fighters will however.
 
Mr. Personality (+CHA -INT): CHA 13 gives you access to some feats, one of which will be covered at lengths later in this guide. Intimidate is a great skill with a lot of uses, and so are Use Magic Device and Diplomacy. Generally speaking Mr. Personality fighters won’t be that smart, and use INT as their dump stat, so expect to be role playing a loudmouth who loves to talk nonsense. You will have to spend resources on skills.
*It is possible to see Mr. Personality types who are naive, or weak willed until their Bravery gets improved upon, such builds do the unthinkable and dump WIS, but have access to more feats and skills at the cost of their mental defenses and general lack of awareness.
 
The Snob (+INT -CHA): investing into INT usually leaves a low CHA, and fighters built this way can come off harsh when role playing. Knowledge checks are common, as are craft checks. These fighters know their equipment and can come off as greedy since they typically excel at crafting and want the most amount of coin possible to invest in either buying or making their gear better. Also known as the blacksmith, they have more skills than most fighters.
 
Any of these roles can be effective, and should all be considered equal depending on the specifics of your own play style and your vision for your character.
Roles in Combat
The fighter has a multitude of roles they can fill in combat- pretty much any that require you to make attack rolls with a weapon. Through their large number of additional feats and newer options they picked up with Advanced Weapon Training you may find yourself asking: why bother with those other classes or why bother with this one? It is important to understand the fighter’s strengths at covering these roles and not try to force yourself into a niche that makes your character redundant or useless when compared to a class that is designed for the role you have chosen in combat.
 
The fighter is designed to do damage, first and foremost. Weapon Training and the fighter exclusive feats mostly rely on flat bonuses that apply to all of your weapon attacks, rather than on attacks against specific targets (like smite evil or favored enemy). When considering this basic design of the class, the more rewarding options will be the ones that can optimize this damage output while spending the least amount of resources on it, being the logic being used to determine any particular role’s rating in this guide. In parentheses next to the name of the role, you will see the primary stat that you can generally expect from choosing that role, and when mixing and matching the attributes from the arrays above you can assemble your character accordingly.
 
BFW (STR)- This is the most straightforward role that most players jump right at. Typically you have a greatsword, earthbreaker, or other big two-hander and go to town smashing, chopping, or stabbing your enemies. This role is the least feat intensive and offers the most freedom in terms of equipment, attributes, and versatility. You could even spend your extra feats on half-investing into another combat role, if you don’t want to focus on picking up out of combat utility.
 
Ranged (DEX)- Archery is very rewarding, but very feat intensive and you may find yourself starving for choices other than doing archery things. Thrown builds require more feats, and specific items. Guns and Crossbows are both done better by the Gunslinger.
 
Tank (CON)- As far as Pathfinder RPG is concerned, the only real way to tank is with certain feats like Antagonize or Call Out, which isn’t useless by any means but you must also consider the fact that this isn’t an MMO where enemies can be forced to attack you without reliable tactical positioning. Tanks in this guide purposely lower their defenses and make the most spectacle on the board to make themselves the most obvious and easy to attack target, taking the damage from attacks that otherwise were meant for one of your teammates. It can be done, and done well, but it requires a lot of feats and monetary investment, and you more or less must own adamantine armor.
 
Power Turtle (STR, DEX, or CON)- Fighters are the best at armor, ever. They are also the best at shields, ever. This role covers sword and board and its variants. It is feat and equipment intensive, though. You will most likely be spending your resources improving your AC, making yourself nigh untouchable and thus a very unattractive target by your enemies (the opposite of a tank by this guide’s standards). Expect your allies to suffer, and to be in longer fights because of it. Optimally, you use your shield as a primary weapon to maximize defense and minimize costs.
Duelist (DEX)- Dex fighters have their merits. You have the benefit of not needing to invest too much into STR, as there are many options to use a different ability in place of it for both hit and damage. You will notice your damage may still not be on par with the BFW or Archer, but these builds do offer more attribute freedom which can give you more out of combat versatility. Before the newer options were released, this was red, as it never could compare to classes like the Swashbuckler and Daring Champion (Cavalier).
 
Two-Weapons (STR & DEX)- yuuuuuuck. Two weapons can work, to be sure, but not very well in practice. Your lack of mobility will be your Achilles heel, and you will find yourself starving for feats, coin, and damage output. You need all the stats, STR for damage, DEX for feats, and CON to not die. There are newer options available however that can make this style not as attribute intensive, including ways to add different attributes to damage in place of STR, but each one of those comes from a feat or magic item and you might find yourself actually running out of feats. To be able to make more than one attack after moving, you will be taxed either another feat or you will have to take an archetype that is generally considered weak by this guide’s standards and it still won’t happen until around level 11. If you really want it though, you can build for it and have some versatility in being able to use light weapons that can also be thrown, allowing you to cover ranged and melee with the same weapons.
 
Mix it Up, Switch Hitter (STR & DEX)- With the large number of feats available, you may actually be able to mix roles; you won’t be the master of one of them, but it can still be a somewhat viable choice. It’s very feat and equipment intensive however. It is possible to have one style trained up as well as one of the purple roles listed here, but the difference between one of those roles and the switch hitter comes down to spending your leftover resources on picking up a secondary role in combat rather than more non combat utility and these types of characters can seem boring or one dimensional when playing them. You also are going to keep two of your weapon groups instead of the one that most specialized fighters get which will cut down on your ability to access more Advanced Weapon Training options.
 
Maneuver Monkey (STR or DEX)- Generally speaking, you will find that classes other than yours can do this better like the Brawler, though the Lore Warden archetype makes a strong case against that. Most of the maneuver feats have a prerequisite of INT 13, which the Stamina System is designed to fix. In any case, most of the time you will be taxed the feat Combat Expertise, and your role in combat will be secondary to a bigger damage dealer since you’ll be spending actions and feats on performing maneuvers instead of attacking. Expect to need someone else on your team to do the heavy lifting as far as damage output goes. This also becomes a less reliable role as the game progresses to later levels when you start encountering less humanoid enemies and more monstrous ones that may be resistant or immune to your maneuvers. You can’t disarm something with claws, and you can’t trip something that’s flying, etc.
The exception to this however, is Sunder, which is something most fighters can look into as the Anti-Mage Fighter is based off it, and you actually use sunder on things other than… things.
