# Comparative Investigation

When you’re deciding what class to play in Pathfinder, it’s so, so easy to get lost. I vividly remember being a new player, awash in a sea of archetypes, classes with terms like “hybrid,” “base,” and “alternate” that I didn’t understand, and class features with clauses I didn’t understand or whose scope I didn’t fully grasp. One of the ways to build the “which class do I pick?” brand of systems mastery is to run comparisons and contrasts between classes. What’s different? What’s the same? Based on the mechanics in front of you, what can you extrapolate about the role the class is meant to play, both in combat and out? In this section, we’ll take a look at how the investigator matches up with three other similar-ish classes (the alchemist, the rogue, and the slayer) and try to draw some conclusions about what investigators are and aren’t meant to do.

## Investigator vs. Alchemist

If you had to submit the investigator class to a paternity test, the alchemist is definitely the baby daddy. And that’s a really good thing! Alchemists are incredibly powerful as Pathfinder classes go, with the archetypes and extracts to be able to fill just about any role that they want, and often at a moment’s notice. Thanks to investigators’ access to alchemist discoveries through their investigator talent class feature and a number of identical class features (poison resistance, alchemy, etc.) there’s a lot of thematic and mechanical overlap between the two classes. Let’s dig in.

If we start with spellcasting, the investigator and alchemist are almost identical. They prepare extracts in the same way, and in the same amount of time; as ⅔ casters, they both receive the same number of extracts per day, with bonus extracts keyed off of Intelligence; they both get access to game-changing spells like alchemical allocation that are so powerful that they act like class features. Both classes will try to aggressively expand their formulae books, whether through rote copying of other wizard,  alchemist, or investigator formulae books, through magic items like the formula alembic, or through feats like Formula Recollection. Having a wide variety of extracts available at all times is the best way to foster the versatility that both these classes are known for. There is one key difference between investigators and alchemists that turns out to be non-trivial, however: investigators cannot use wands of their extracts without a successful UMD check, whereas alchemists can. This seemed like an oversight for a while, but no, Paizo eventually clarified their position on the matter. Neither of the classes that use extract casting are counted as spellcasters in the traditional sense, and so the “spells” that they cast don’t actually count as spells known for the purposes of activating spell-completion items (scrolls) and spell trigger items (wands). In order to get back on an even playing field, investigators will almost certainly need to take traits like Pragmatic Activator, talents like Device Talent, or create custom magic items to give them competence bonuses to UMD (a +5 competence bonus will only cost 2500 gp) in order to effectively use their own extracts without “casting” them by drinking them. This quest to become excellent at UMD yields dividends in other arenas, of course, because UMD will work for wands and scrolls from any class, not just your own. By the time investigators can reliably hit a DC 20 UMD check, they’ll be off the races, stealing everyone’s spells.

Turning now to combat prowess, I’m sad to report that alchemists definitely have the edge in both ranged and melee arenas. An alchemist’s bombs can deal any energy type, debuff like crazy, and inflict massive nova damage to a single target and great splash damage to adjacent targets; it’s simply not possible for the investigator class to beat that level of damage in a head-to-head fight. Likewise, the alchemist’s ability to foray into the feral mutagen, greater mutagen, and grand mutagen discoveries makes them effortlessly better at melee combat if they’ve selected the vivisectionist archetype or other combat-focused archetypes. Investigators, who don’t share access to any of the alchemist’s bombs or mutagen powers (barring the base mutagen ability, which must be selected as an investigator talent) will struggle to keep up with a well-built alchemist in terms of raw damage output. Investigators will probably be more accurate after studied combat has a few levels to ramp up, and the inspired weapon enchantment can go a decent way toward plumping up your damage numbers; even so, alchemists tend to rule the roost when it comes to insta-gibbing legions of enemies or getting scary-big and trashing bosses. It’s okay! Investigators were built for other things.

What other things, you ask? Well, skills would be a good place to start. Alchemists get two fewer skill ranks every level than investigators do, and the inspiration mechanic lets investigators pull immediately ahead of alchemists. If alchemists want to be good at skills, they’ve either got to burn resources on the inspiring cognatogen line (and forsake either mutagens or cognatogens, taking penalties to their physical ability scores while they’re at it) or they’ve got to invest in sub-par discoveries like pheromones or webbed extremities. Thanks to inspiration and the various talents associated with that resource, investigators can excel at skill checks all day. Don’t discount the importance of this ability! A good number of combats begin only because someone can’t crush the skill check needed to avoid, bluff, spook, or outsmart the enemies in question; an investigator can do so without having to expend any resources, which opens their extracts up for truly important combat applications. Alchemists do well in combat, but need extract support to do well outside of it; investigators tend to do well outside of combat, but need extract support to truly excel in a melee. Both have advantages and disadvantages!

Lastly, if I may speak from a somewhat personal, subjective standpoint, alchemists are a bit flighty. They’re okay at figuring out mysteries, passing Knowledge checks, connecting the dots—you can only force an INT-based class to land so far from the tree on that one—but ultimately there’s not a lot of finesse to the class. If you’re a grenadier, you’ll get fast bombs, precise bombs, a couple debuffing variants, and then just spam explosives at every problem until it’s a fine powder; if you’re a vivisectionist or other melee monster, you’ll grab mutagens and as many natural attacks as you can, get big with enlarge person or other polymorph extracts, and hit stuff until it dies. You can get very good at those things as an alchemist, don’t mistake me! But some problems require discernment, skill, patience, and perspicacity instead of raw might, and it’s there that you ought to accept no substitute for the investigator. Where alchemists madly amputate with a hacksaw, investigators go in with a scalpel and exquisite knowledge of anatomy.

The tl;dr version: in spite of many similarities, alchemists need less support from extracts, magic items, etc. to do their thing in combat, but more support to contribute meaningfully outside of combat; for investigators, it’s the reverse. Both classes have similar weapon proficiencies, armor proficiencies, and extract casting, making them evenly paired on that front.

## Investigator vs. Rogue

Oh, the rogue: “the class so nice they wrote it twice.” Rogues are odd ducks in the Pathfinder world, and there’s a reason they’ve acquired a reputation as being significantly behind the power curve. Paizo got better at writing balanced classes as time went on (one could also argue that that was simply due to power creep); to whit, the rogue, ranger, and monk all got more and more musty as time went. Barring specialized archetypes, monks mostly got superseded by unchained monks and brawlers in later class releases, and rangers’ souls were split into slayers (non-magical combat monsters) and hunters (¾-BAB, ⅔ casters with powerful animal companions) in order to clarify their purpose. Rogues likewise got their “spirits” refined and purposes clarified in future books. There was very clearly a split in what the rogue class chassis wanted to be: either the deadly assassin type, striking from the dark to kill enemies in a single well-placed blow, or the consummate skill monkey on the wrong side of the law, able to pick any lock, steal anything not nailed down, and charm the hearts of gentlefolk everywhere. All these identities, as it turned out, were better rendered in other classes, which finally swept the core rogue’s leg and sent it tumbling onto the mat. The slayer, of course, is the immediate choice for rogue players who want to be able to actually deal a lot of damage in combat, boasting full BAB, studied target, and even sneak attack dice. The vigilante, meanwhile, can take over many of the rogue’s stealth, infiltration, intimidation, and assassination functionalities better than the rogue itself. But as for that skill monkey, well, that role fell to the investigator!

One of the problems, you see, is the way skill ranks work in Pathfinder—an inherent, mechanical limitation of the system. The rogue class tells you that it is the One True Skill Monkey, then points to its 8 + Intelligence skill ranks as evidence supporting this assertion. But surely skills aren’t just about breadth, but also depth, right? This was where things started to go off the rails. The problem is that there simply aren’t that many class-exclusive ways to get skill bonuses in Pathfinder. Class skills? Yeah, everyone has those. Ranks? Yep, even the 2 + Intelligence classes can still invest in a few skills. Magic items? Everyone has the same wealth by level, so it’s definitely possible for a full-BAB martial character to get those eyes of the eagle. Spells? Rogues never had those to begin with, barring wands or scrolls they could use with UMD. Do you begin to see the problem? With roughly the same level of investment, a rogue who was hyperspecialized in Perception, or Disable Device, or Disguise wouldn’t necessarily be any better than a summoner, or a swashbuckler, or even a fighter that was hyperspecialized in those things. Because the rogue didn’t add bonuses on top of what skill ranks and magic items could provide, it didn’t have a truly legitimate claim to the title of the One True Skill Monkey.

Other classes, of course, managed to solve this. Bards and skalds have bardic knowledge, inquisitors have stern gaze and monster lore, occultists have magic item skill—and investigators have inspiration. Although the mechanic is, by its nature, a little more random than the static, passive bonuses available in other classes, I think that’s part of what makes it fun! Investigators have lived a whole lot of life, and that shows up in their moments of sudden acuity. Now, if you want to be noticeably better at a single skill, rather than the same amount of better at a lot of skills, you have only to invest in talents that improve your inspiration and skill checks: there’s Expanded Inspiration and Underworld Inspiration, of course, then the Amazing Inspiration and Tenacious Inspiration talents; certain archetypes like the questioner or empiricist can take bonuses and stack even more bonuses on. Even by 3rd or 4th level, it will become clear to most investigator players that they’re spanking the pants off of their rogue parent where skills are concerned.

As far as combat and versatility go, the investigator once again has the rogue pretty handily outclassed. Alchemy alone is a huge boost to what the investigator is capable of, and can slather on even more skill or combat bonuses when you need them. And man, talk about alchemy making rogue talents like Major Magic look ridiculous! A 1st-level spell, once per day? Gee, golly, mister, you shouldn’t have! The other problem that rogues suffer from in the combat arena is what I call “Core Monk Syndrome.” The basics? You’ve got a bunch of damage, but no way to hit anything. A 20th-level core monk can launch a flurry of seven blows, all with 2d10 damage dice. “Whoa,” you think, “that’s going to be insane when I get there!” Guess what the median AC of a CR 20 creature is, though? 37. Sure, you’ll have some bonuses from Strength and your handwraps, but the fact is that 3-5 of those attacks couldn’t land against an enemy with AC 37 except on a Nat 20. The core rogue suffers from a similar problem: sneak attack dice are sooo enticing, but the rogue has ¾ BAB and no way to significantly raise their attack bonuses through magic, class features, etc. So there they sit, whiffing on a good 50-75% of their attacks against even-CR creatures. Against enemies with precision damage immunities, all-around vision or improved uncanny dodge, true seeing, etc., rogues simply don’t have anywhere left to go. Investigators do, though! Thanks to studied combat, a 20th-level investigator’s basic attack bonuses will be brought up to +25/+20+15, with haste making that +25/+25/+20/+15, whereas rogues will still be stuck at +15/+10/+5. They won’t deal the awe-inspiring damage that rogues can on a successful sneak attack, but they’ll also be hitting far, far more often than rogues. You can fish for criticals, dole out debuffs through Sickening Offensive and Sapping Offensive, proc weapon enchantments like inspiring, etc., but only if you hit. Except where DR is a concern, I’d take a 100% chance to hit for 5 damage over a 5% chance to hit for 100 damage any day of the week.

The tl;dr version: core rogues can’t really surpass investigators in skills, versatility, or combat. The class was just designed before Paizo really knew how to break free from the restrictions of 3.5e, and other classes swooped in and took over much of its turf. Investigators are one take on “rogues as they should have been.”

## Investigator vs. Slayer

The investigator-slayer pairing is probably the most dissimilar of any I’ll discuss here, which is why it comes last. It’s not totally dissimilar, though. Remember that both the slayer and the investigator have the core rogue as one of their parent classes, and that commonality shines through in a couple of class features. The most noticeable commonality between them is their “studied ____” class feature. These are different class features, technically, but they function in much the same way: assuming that both classes can see their target, they can pick out some vital area and continue to strike that vital for more damage. For investigators, studied combat is limited in duration, restricted to only one target, harder to get started in the action economy, and deals entirely precision damage, which doesn’t multiply on a crit; for slayers, studied target is unlimited in duration, limited to fewer than five targets, pretty easy to squeeze in as a swift action, and provides normal damage bonuses that do multiply on a crit. All in all, I believe that studied target is the mechanically superior class feature, but it does make sense—slayers are meant to be incredibly lethal in combat, and their mechanics should match that design goal. Against studied targets, however, there’s not that great of a difference between a 20th-level investigator and 20th-level slayer; the slayer will be hitting at +25/+20/+15/+10, while the investigator will be hitting at +25/+20/+15. Even with the addition of haste or other common buffs, that’s not a world of difference.

Slayers do come with other advantages, though. There’s sneak attack, which, while weaker than the rogue’s version, is far easier to take advantage of with full BAB and studied target. There’s the slayer’s access to ranger combat styles, which lets them build themselves out to be anything they want to be by scooping feats with onerous prerequisites for free. Investigators, perpetually hamstrung by their slower BAB progression and lack of any bonus feats, won’t be able to keep up with the fancy tricks that slayers can pull. Pure power isn’t everything, as the investigator proves, and what slayers earn in power they pay for in versatility and out-of-combat utility. Inspiration, skill ranks, and extract casting wipe the floor with anything the slayer chassis is capable of; you’ll find the investigator “stumped” by far fewer situations than a slayer would be.

The tl;dr version: slayers more than earn their reputation as one of Pathfinder’s most fearsome combat classes, but investigators don’t do too badly at keeping up. Where skills and versatility are concerned, slayers lose to investigators like one-legged men at a butt-kicking contest.

## Some Conclusions

Investigators aren’t meant to be the frontline combatants: think of them as “battlefield helpers.” Slayers and alchemists are both more powerful in outright combat, but investigators can often take the subtle approach to dismantling enemies: succeeding at Knowledge checks, advising their team, flanking, debuffing with investigator talents, passing off crits with Butterfly’s Sting...investigators can hold their own admirably if they need to, certainly far better than core rogues, but they’re still meant to be a class that helps other classes shine. A good investigator player is a force multiplier, not the force itself.

Investigators’ power comes first and foremost from their skills, extract casting, and ability to wield alchemical allocation effectively. Investigators should never, ever be caught without the perfect tool for the job! It’s their duty to know what the job is, what it will likely require, and what the quickest and most lateral route is to accomplishing the job. You’re light on your feet and fantastic with skills; every spell on your spell list is no more than a minute away; and you can do admirable team- or self-buffing with Infusion, extracts, elixirs, and potions. Investigators will only be as powerful as their players’ mastery of those systems.

That said, don’t be afraid to mix it up! Investigators will surprise you with how good they can be in combat, between studied combat, studied strike, Combat Inspiration, the inspired weapon enchantment, and more. Just because an enemy isn’t focusing on you doesn’t mean you can’t shank ‘em in the kidney really hard when they’re not looking.

“It's an anagram, isn't it, Doctor? Hester Mofet, 'The rest of me.

Miss The-Rest-of-Me,' meaning that you rented that garage.”

—Clarice Starling, FBI Investigator
