# Dips, Gestalt, and Prestige

## Dips

For new players, “dipping” describes the process of taking some small number of class levels in a different class than the class the player intends to end up in eventually. One-level dips are the easiest, and most players agree that after about three levels you’re not really “dipping” anymore, but going for a truer multiclass. Dipping usually accomplishes a few things—the more things, the better the case for the dip.

Gaining class features that aren’t level-dependent. The paladin’s divine grace class feature, for example, simply adds your Charisma modifier to all your saving throws. You don’t need any further levels in paladin to enable the combo, which makes this particular dip attractive for Charisma-based classes.

Smoothing away feat prerequisites. This is a big one for investigators, who are generally very short on feats. Many classes grant one or more bonus feats at 1st and 2nd level—the monk is a good example. If a dip can plow down many of the feat prerequisites you’ll need for your build, the tradeoff you make in lost class features from your main class can be worth it.

Weapon or armor proficiencies. This is another fairly big one for investigators, who get access to only a few martial weapons, light armor, and no shields. If you’re playing a Strength-based melee investigator, for example, you’ll likely want to invest less in Dexterity, but that means your AC will suffer unless you’re able to use medium or heavy armor. A one-level dip in fighter can solve that!

BAB or saves. BAB and saves are somewhat incidental when considering a dip—nice if it happens, but not necessary. Again using a one-level fighter dip, we can see that a Strength-based investigator would be able to grab Power Attack at 1st level (since the fighter’s BAB at 1st level is +1) instead of waiting until 3rd level like they would have if they had gone with only investigator levels.

With the general parameters of dipping set up, what kinds of classes should we be looking into for our investigators?

Inspired Blade Swashbuckler 1: This is probably the most iconic dip for any investigator who wants to use Weapon Finesse with a rapier to attack using Dexterity instead of Strength. The main purpose of this dip is #2, as the inspired blade archetype grants free Weapon Finesse and Weapon Focus (Rapier) at 1st level, which then allows you to use your remaining 1st-level feat to pick up Fencing Grace and add Dexterity to damage. There’s a lesser element of #1: getting a panache pool lets you use Opportune Parry and Riposte a decent number of times per day; investing in crit-fishing tools like Improved Critical or the keen weapon enchantment will let you replenish that pool more easily.

Fighter 1: No need to monkey around with archetypes in the fighter class. You’re here for the bonus feat at 1st level, the better BAB and Fortitude save, and the weapon/armor proficiencies. It’s a particularly good dip for Strength-based melee investigators, who will want all of those things.

Occultist 1: This is another great dip for Strength-based investigators, as one level of occultist grants you +2 to your Fortitude save, medium armor and martial weapon proficiency, a couple cantrips and 1st-level spells, and two implement schools. It’s a great little package that adds more versatility than a fighter dip, at the expense of fewer HP, lower BAB, and no bonus feats. The real power of the occultist lies in their implement schools, though, so here are my recommendations:

Transmutation: This is the real winner. We’re looking for effects that last minutes/level, are available at 1st level, and continue to have good effects even when not upgraded. Transmutation fits that brief. Physical Enhancement gives you better physical stats, Legacy Weapon is perfect for grabbing a ghost touch or bane weapon when you really need it, and Philosopher’s Touch (my recommendation for your free focus power) is aces at overcoming rarer DR types.

Enchantment: Glorious Presence is decent for boosting your UMD checks, or face skills if you’re not going with an Orator build. Inspired Assault is the perfect match for our fledgling occultist, though: lasts 1 minute, provides a decent bonus even at 1st level, and doesn’t rely on any failed saves.

Evocation: Light Matrix is a decent utility power for investigators, who (barring the lamplighter archetype) don’t otherwise receive access to light cantrips. Still not what I would call excellent, though.

Necromancy: You’re here for Soulbound Puppet, which grants you a familiar for 10 minutes. Not fantastic, but also not nothing. Familiars can be very useful, even for short periods.

Pistolero/Musket Master Gunslinger 5: Dipping this far into a class isn’t a “dip,” per se, but for investigators looking to use guns, it’s really the only way to do so safely: you need to be able to full-attack, and the only way to do that is to drop reload times down to reasonable levels. Only these two archetypes can give that to you. I’d suggest the jinyiwei investigator archetype with this “dip” in order to conserve your casting stat.

Oracle 1: Several mysteries offer revelations that grant great bonuses at 1st level—I’m thinking things like Temporal Celerity or War Sight from the Time and Battle mysteries. It’s not an ideal dip, especially given the Charisma/Intelligence mismatch, but it is there.

Alchemist 1: This dip is a trap, unfortunately. You’ve got cool class features like mutagen and bombs, all of which are still very useful for investigators, but they’re dependent entirely on alchemist levels. Dips ain’t about class features that rely on class levels.

Rake/Thug Rogue 3: Most of these effects are reproducible through feats or traits without needing to resort to dipping. Demoralize builds are kind of a niche investigator function anyway.

## Variant Multiclassing

Introduced in Pathfinder Unchained, Variant Multiclassing (or VMC, for short) allowed players to progress two classes in parallel, rather than in sequence. The price—there’s always a price—is most of your feats. Womp womp. For classes like fighter, where feats aren’t a problem, VMC can be an excellent adjunct to your class abilities, giving you new tools for little overall penalty. The issue with VMC and investigators is that investigators receive no bonus feats, and are already incredibly feat-hungry: you’ll be sucking down as many instances of Extra Investigator Talent as you can manage whenever you’re on a break from your main combat build priorities. Unfortunately, I simply can’t recommend VMCing away from the investigator for anyone. You’re just spread too thin. And because the investigator is a hybrid class, you can’t VMC into investigator, either! How fun.

## Gestalt Builds

Gestalt character creation is a process that essentially combines all the class features and casting capabilities of two classes, and is typically done when PCs need to be extra powerful, as when an adventure path designed for a four-person party is only being run by two or three PCs. Complete rules can be found here. It’s not terribly difficult to pick a gestalt class, because anything you choose isn’t a trade-off so much as an addition. That said, there are choices that maximize what investigators can already do, so in this section we’ll detail general precepts for what you should be looking out for in a gestalt pairing.

First and foremost, we’re looking for a partner class that benefits from a high Intelligence score. The point buy rules at your table may vary, but many GMs will not budge on 20-point buy, which means that you have to find a class that makes the most of the stats that you’ll already be boosting: Intelligence, Constitution, and either Dexterity or Strength.

Second, our partner class should patch the investigator’s weaknesses. A d8 hit die is one such weakness; a weak Fortitude save, ¾ BAB, and the absence of bonus combat feats might be other areas to consider shoring up.

First, let’s start out with what you’re not allowed to do. The investigator is a hybrid of the alchemist and the rogue classes, so as fun as it would be to have an alchemist/investigator crossover, I don’t think it’s something that most GMs would permit at their tables. By all means, try! The alchemist’s bombs and discoveries plus the investigator’s inspiration and studied combat would make for an insane and volatile mixture. Moving on from those classes, there are any number of full casters that use Intelligence as their main casting stat: witch, wizard, arcanist, sage bloodline sorcerer, and psychic all fit the bill just fine. Here you begin running into a few problems, however. For starters, there’s arcane spell failure chance. Investigators aren’t huge on armor, true, and Dexterity-based investigators can make do with a haramaki, which has no spell failure chance. The slightly bigger problem, however, is one of feats. Casters generally need a lot of feats in order to be effective. Combat Casting, Spell Focus, Spell Penetration, various metamagic feats...it starts to add up. That’s not a big problem for casters, who have no other combat priorities, but because the investigator was built to be a striker class, you’re left suddenly doing double duty on feats—and you don’t have that many to begin with. Even with no investment, full casters will still be very powerful, but I wouldn’t call it an optimal choice.

With full casters a suboptimal choice, let’s move to the opposite side of the spectrum: full-BAB martial classes with no innate casting. The advantages here are numerous: martial classes often get bonus feats (one of the investigator’s biggest weaknesses), come with attack and damage bonuses that synergize extraordinarily well with studied combat, and boast higher HD and Fortitude saves than the investigator can bring by itself. Let’s start simple with the fighter. If that seems like a surprising pairing, just think about it for a second: fighters have poor out-of-combat utility, where investigators excel. Investigators are perpetually strapped for feats, which fighters provide in spades. Fighters struggle to compete when magic is afoot, but the investigator has extract casting to handle that. Investigators feel pretty squishy with a d8 HD, poor Fortitude saves, and light armor proficiency only, but the fighter neatly solves all of those problems. Weapon training and studied combat are a match made in heaven, letting you take four iterative attacks (+35/+30/+25/+20 without any attribute, gear, or spell bonuses) at 20th level, and the bonus feats let you build whatever the hell you want for your combat chassis. If you have no other priorities, select Extra Investigator Talent over and over and become the world’s best skill monkey. Oh, and advanced weapon training? You could just die from how good those are, right?

If you’re looking for something a little more lithe, the inspired blade swashbuckler also does very well for itself. A one-level dip in this archetype is classic for Dexterity-based investigators, but the rest of the archetype continues to do good work in a gestalt game. You don’t receive as many bonus feats as the fighter, and lose your good Fortitude save, but some will feel that the addition of nimble, charmed life, and your various swashbuckler deeds compensates you for the loss. Your inspired strike class feature’s bonus type unfortunately conflicts with studied combat, but that is what it is. Moving on from the swashbuckler, we’ve got the siege gunner gunslinger. Unfortunately, siege gunner just isn’t that great of an archetype. You’ll get to keep your Intelligence focus, but at the cost of much of what makes a gunslinger powerful. It wouldn’t be my first choice, because after all, who’s ever used a siege gun in Pathfinder? Slayer usually does well in gestalt match-ups, and the match-up with the investigator is no different. One problem that you’ll have to work around is the action input to use studied target and studied combat—both will require swift actions after a certain point, so it might take you a round or two to get fully buffed up against a single target. If you’re willing to make that sacrifice (or work around it with the Domino Effect investigator talent) the class rocks as hard as ever. Brawler is also an interesting choice, surprisingly stat-agnostic and extremely flexible. Between your extract casting and martial flexibility, this gestalt pairing is probably the heaviest on systems mastery that anyone could come up with; bonus feats and brawler’s cunning can do a lot to clear your path, though. Dark elementalist kineticist is an option for basing the kineticist off of Intelligence, but I don’t know enough about the kineticist class to make a call on whether it makes a good pairing or not. It’s restricted to evil alignments only; that might be more than enough to steer you away.

By this point, we’ve moved down into other ⅔ casting classes. These classes won’t provide any improvements in BAB or HP, but the addition of yet another casting chassis on top of the investigator’s can make for some potent combos. Let’s start with one of my favorites: occultist. Focus powers and implement schools can be monstrously powerful, and it’s generally agreed upon that there’s very little a well-prepared occultist can’t do. The addition of the Trappings of the Warrior panoply also introduces some potential for a full-BAB occultist. Very cool. Magus needs a shout-out, of course. Between qualifying for fighter feats, spellstrike/spell combat, magus arcana, scaling armor proficiencies, a good Fortitude save progression, and the many benefits of an arcane pool, magi are definitely equipped where investigators need it most. Magi also have some unique archetypes available to them—hexcrafter, bladebound, kensai, eldritch archer, greensting slayer, jistkan artificer...the list goes on. The living grimoire inquisitor and chronicler of worlds bard are archetype-specific options that change the normally Wisdom- and Charisma-based inquisitor and bard classes to an Intelligence-based class. Unlike the occultist or magi classes, which can be dealt with flexibly thanks to their reliance on Intelligence, only these archetypes will be viable for an investigator gestalt, which makes the pairing a little less exciting. Both archetypes give up important class features (judgment, cunning initiative, and monster lore for the living grimoire; versatile performance, bardic knowledge, and one or two good bardic performances for the chronicler of worlds) in exchange for features that you may or may not find useful. They’re still good, just not as good as an occultist or magus gestalt. Lastly, there’s the warlock or cabalist vigilante. Neither of these is a terrible pick, but they’re trying so hard to be a magus that I think you might be better off just going magus.

Jinyiwei bonus round! I won’t devote as much space to these jabronis, but moving the class over to a Wisdom base lets you consider some different pairings. Hunter, gunslinger, warpriest, inquisitor, ranger, druid, shaman, and cleric are all pretty wonderful pairings in their own ways. Shaman, druids, and clerics scratch the full casting itch, rangers can provide great bonus feats (although really, why not just go slayer?), and hunters, inquisitors, and warpriests all make good complements to the investigator’s innate talents. And hey, gunslinger can make a ranged investigator good, finally!

## Prestige Classes

I’ve grown a bit tired of the extensive write-ups I do on prestige classes. They can be powerful, to be sure, but most newer players will never touch prestige classes, and veteran players usually know the relative merits of the prestige classes they’re investigating. Nevertheless, I’ll do a brief write-up here in the interest of completeness. We’re just gonna go alphabetically!

Brewkeeper is where we’ll start; you can enter by 6th level. The prestige class was designed almost exclusively for the alchemist class, and while the investigator can qualify for it through many of the same class features as the alchemist has, certain abilities like harmful homebrew don’t work out as well for investigators as they do for alchemists. The main draw of the prestige class is that it allows you to add metamagic effects to your extracts, then pass them out to allies for free; the potion master ability is also fantastic for crafting-focused investigators, as it acts as a free Enhance Potion anytime you want it. Five or six levels will be enough to get what you want from the class, taking Extend Spell at 2nd level, Heighten Spell at 4th, and Maximize (if you get there) at 6th.

Next up, Chernasardo Warden. This one was designed specifically for the Ironfang Invasion campaign, and it’s got some pretty heavy Nirmathas flavor—there’s no reason a Chernasardo Ranger would be in Osirion for a Mummy’s Mask campaign, for example. If you can work with that flavor, though, the prestige class is excellent, granting you bonus feats, SLAs, Will save bonuses vs. [mind-affecting] and (compulsion) effects, and, perhaps most importantly, five levels of investigator progression even as you gain ten levels of prestige class progression. Your extracts and talents will suffer, but what you gain from the class is more than worth it. I know I’m skipping here, but Mortal Usher is very similar to Chernasardo Warden—mechanically, at least—and similarly powerful. Mortal usher is a little easier to work into an average campaign than Chernasardo warden, which is always a perk. Chernasardo warden can be entered at 8th level (assuming you didn’t dip any other full-BAB classes) but mortal usher is doable by 7th.

Daggermark Poisoner is on deck. I don’t know a great deal about poisons, other than to say that investigators don’t receive all the necessary elements of a poison build on their own. Honestly, you’re probably best off building an alchemist if poisoning is your goal, but daggermark poisoner can help you ease the strain if you’re dead-set on having an investigator slip cyanide into someone’s dinner. I’ll leave a link to the poison section of this guide, which will refer you to other guides more specifically focused on poisoning. If you decide this prestige class is for you, entry is possible by 6th level, although you’ll surrender all your class features and casting to do so.

Evangelist is a fun prestige class, mostly because of the aligned class feature that it gets, which allows you nine full levels of your base class progression while also giving you ten levels of prestige class progression. The evangelist’s class features, BAB, saves, etc. aren’t anything to get excited about, so the real draw here will be the boons your deity grants from the Deific Obedience feat. If the boons are excellent, evangelist will be excellent; if they suck, evangelist will suck. Entry is easy by 6th level.

Hinterlander is a bit of an unusual choice, but one that I’m sticking by for ranged investigators, who are hampered more than anything by the vast bevy of feats they need to be effective. I can’t honestly recommend that you invest more than five levels in hinterlander—it’s enough to get all the bonus feats you need, and no more. You can take your pick for 1st-level archery feats (Rapid Shot would be best) but 3rd and 5th levels should be taken up with Improved Precise Shot and Point-Blank Master or Pinpoint Targeting, respectively. Entry isn’t super easy, given the Endurance and Weapon Focus requirements; you’ll probably need to play as an elf in order to get longbow proficiency, then spend your first three feats on PBS, Weapon Focus, and Endurance in order to enter by 6th level.

Master Chymist really only ever gets recommended to alchemists, and it’s a brutally effective prestige class for those who want to lean into mutagen usage and melee carnage. Investigators will mostly use master chymist levels to qualify for the Greater and Grand Mutagen discoveries, which aren’t normally on their list of allowed alchemist discoveries. Nimble, Growth Mutagen, Evasion, and Extended Mutagen are also great. You’ll be giving up most of your skill dominance as a master chymist, but the trade-off in Fortitude saves, BAB, HP, and scary damage in melee may be worth it to you. Entry is possible by 8th level, and you won’t want to wait too much longer after that to jump in—you have to suck the marrow out of this class ASAP.

Sleepless Detective, in spite of a name that makes it sound like it should be built for investigators, actually feels far more like a rogue prestige class. Eh, okay. This is a cool flavor match with many investigator archetypes, but unfortunately, I can’t recommend more than one level to scoop canny sleuth (Intelligence modifier to Perception and Sense Motive checks), forensic thaumaturgy (at-will detect magic), and +1d6 sneak attack. The Alertness prereq is a bummer, but otherwise, entry is easy by 6th level.

“Finish it, Flavisham!”
