# Anticaster

Anticaster


        I’ve refined my thoughts on the anticaster role considerably over the years, and my most convincing essay on the subject thus far can be found here, in my guide to the Pathfinder occultist. In that link, I lay out a number of areas that Pathfinder classes need to be proficient in to become high-quality magehunters, including strong touch AC, energy resistances, and Fortitude/Will saves, counters to defensive caster tricks like mirror image or displacement, counters to battlefield control and summoning, mobility options, ways to debuff concentration checks, etc. Mesmerists simply do not have many of these tools available to them. What they do have are plenty of ways to debuff an enemy caster through the floor while another more specialized ally takes the caster on head-to-head. Sapped Magic and Distracted are great bold stare improvements for this playstyle, helping make casters both less likely to pass their concentration checks to cast defensively (Distracted) and less threatening even when they do manage to cast a spell (Sapped Magic). Most of the purple- or blue-rated mesmerist tricks, likewise, will be extraordinarily effective against spellcasters if implanted in such an ally: Astounding Avoidance, Gift of Will, etc. are almost tailor-made for martial allies facing spellcasters. Once you have the requisite bold stare improvements and mesmerist tricks covered, being an effective anticaster facilitator is just a small matter of picking an appropriate spell (preferably one keyed off of a Fortitude save) to cripple the enemy while your ally closes in. Stare feats such as Confusing Stare or Blinding Stare can also help you break down a caster without you even needing to be close.
________________
