# Any Changes You’d Make, Allerseelen?

Any Changes You’d Make, Allerseelen?


Funny you should ask that! Yes, there are some select changes I’d make to the mesmerist. Careful third-party changes can improve many of the acknowledged design flaws in Pathfinder, and the mesmerist class definitely has features that I would call design flaws. Let’s go over what my proposed changes are:


1. Allow one additional painful stare trigger per round at 3rd, 9th, and 15th level; the Manifold Stare feat now allows mesmerists to use Stare feats more than once per round. Mesmerists are incredibly dependent on the Manifold Stare feat to deal damage, but as written, painful stare can only be triggered once per round for about the same damage as a rogue’s sneak attack; if you want to buy into a better damage progression, you need to take Manifold Stare three times, sometimes trading away bold stare improvements in order to do so. This is an unnecessary and onerous tax on the class. Giving mesmerists the ability to deal painful stare damage two, three, and four times per round (at 3rd, 9th, and 15th levels) still leaves them behind the rogue in pure damage, so the balance is there. If players really want to push for extra damage (Intense Pain), extra debuffing (Blinding Stare, Confusing Stare), or some combination of the two (Compounded Pain), then my suggestion is to alter the Manifold Stare feat to allow Stare feats to be used two, three, and four times per round, depending on how many times you’ve taken the feat. Without Manifold Stare, mesmerists can only use Intense Pain or any of the other Stare feats once per round. The net effect of this change is that the power floor comes up to a reasonable level, but the ceiling doesn’t get any higher. This change is sorely needed.
2. Extend the effective range of the hypnotic stare by 10 feet every 4 class levels—40 feet at 4th level, 50 feet at 8th level, etc. Here’s another problem: mesmerists basically can’t do ranged builds. There are three basic obstacles: first, not enough feats. Changes #1 and #3 would at least allow ranged mesmerists to skip Manifold Stare and Point-Blank Shot, making a ranged build more reasonable. Second, no proficiency with anything but crossbows, a playstyle that requires—guess what?—more feat investment for Rapid Reload and potentially Crossbow Mastery. Change #4 gives mesmerists shortbow proficiency, which won’t break the damage curve and allows them to get by without crossbows, so that’s another problem solved. Third, and perhaps most intractably, hypnotic stare has a pitiful range of 30 feet, and that range never changes unless you take multiple instances of the Extended Stare feat, each of which increases the class feature’s range by 10 feet. This puts ranged mesmerists into the impossible position of wanting to get as far from enemies as possible (d8 HD, poor Fortitude save, light armor, etc.) but needing to remain within 30 feet in order to use their best class feature. How would you feel if a fighter’s weapon training bonuses only functioned against foes within 30 feet? Extending the range of hypnotic stare as a mesmerist gains psychic power not only makes thematic sense, it also enables ranged builds to function effectively without a single ill-timed five-foot step breaking hypnotic stare and ruining your next turn.
3. Use some of the Elephant in the Room feat tax rules, particularly relating to Weapon Finesse and Point-Blank Shot. Because mesmerists are not given the tools to create single-class Strength builds (since they receive no martial weapon proficiency, medium armor proficiency, or heavy armor proficiency) they’re all but required to use Dexterity builds, which means feat taxes in the form of Weapon Finesse and Point-Blank Shot. Call me a romantic, but I believe feats should add something to the character, not simply make you a functional combatant. And it’s not like there’s a Strength-based option for mesmerists that I’m ignoring—if you’re not Dexterity-based as a single-class mesmerist, you’re going to get splattered. So follow the Elephant in the Room rule that gives every player Weapon Finesse and eliminates Point-Blank Shot from the ranged feat progression.
4. Give mesmerists shortbow and rapier proficiency. For a d8 HD class that’s ostensibly meant to participate in combat, single-class mesmerists get shockingly few weapons to do so. Whip, sure, but that requires a bunch of feats to function. Sap, sure, but that’s nonlethal and doesn’t damage all enemies. Sword cane, sure, but that’s just an inferior copy of the rapier. Crossbows, sure, but they’re just bows with more feat requirements. The crit range is the main difference between the rapier and the sword cane, but giving mesmerists rapier proficiency won’t break the bank because most of a mesmerist’s damage comes from painful stare, and precision damage doesn’t multiply on critical hits. Shortbows have a shorter range and smaller damage die than crossbows—neither of which mesmerists really care about, since hypnotic stare’s range is small and, again, they deal most of their damage through painful stare. What mesmerists really care about is streamlining their feat progression, which is an advantage that shortbow and longbow builds have over crossbows. So just give ‘em shortbow proficiency, GMs. Treat ‘em like investigators.
________________
