# ¾-BABers and ⅔-Casters

¾-BABers and ⅔-Casters


        Finally, we’ve got the ¾-BAB and ⅔ casting classes. As a rule, these classes won’t grant increases in your highest-level spells, your BAB, or your HD. What they can do, however, is graft other equally versatile classes onto the mesmerist. Starting at the top, we’ve got the bard/skald. There’s a lot of overlap between bards/skalds and mesmerists on everything from saves to BAB to spell lists, but where the mesmerist is the master of debuffing, the bard/skald is the master of buffing. A single gestalt mesmerist/bard can grease the wheels of combat to such an incredible degree that most teams will simply steamroll combat once inspire courage and bold stare are both activated. Hunter, investigator, alchemist, magus, and warpriest don’t have a lot to offer, mostly because the non-Charisma mental attributes required will start to make the class too MAD to accomplish anything. I have to give an honorable mention to the sworn of the eldest inquisitor, which turns the inquisitor’s casting stat into Charisma—it’s gathlain-only, but that’s no trouble, since gathlain are a pretty solid mesmerist race already. Finally, this list wouldn’t be complete without mentioning the unchained rogue, which feels like an unofficial parent class of the mesmerist already. Sneak attack + painful stare is an absolute delight, debilitating injury stacks wonderfully with Disorientation and other bold stare improvements, finesse training gives the mesmerist everything it needs to start a Dexterity build, free of charge, and any spellcasting added to the rogue chassis slaps hard. Tough to imagine anything more iconic. Ninja is eminently possible, but without a Paizo-official unchained version, probably less ideal than the unchained rogue. Besides, much of what people love about the ninja class is that it adds some spellcasting options to the rogue (vanishing trick, etc.), and the mesmerist needs no help there. A teisatsu vigilante is probably closer to being optimal if you still want the ninja flavor, and gives you the added deliciousness of social talents and vigilante talents.
