# Casting Spells

Casting Spells


        The mesmerist spell list is built to do four things, and four things only: 1) debuff, 2) debuff, 3) debuff, and 4) social interaction, I guess? Oh, sure, there’s the odd battlefield control spell (mind fog, impossible angles) or self-buff (mirror image, displacement, hermean potential), but on the whole, there is no problem so intractable that the mesmerist spell list thinks it cannot debuff itself out of it. Whether your enemies are rich or poor, young or old, humanoid or non-humanoid, spellcaster or martial, the mesmerist spell list has some nasty tricks up its sleeves tailored just for them. Now, I won’t deny that many of the mesmerist spells simply don’t work against some enemy types—247 out of your 554 total spells are mind-affecting (about 45%), so unless you take the Psychic Inception bold stare improvement, the spirit walker archetype, or some third avenue that I’m not aware of, constructs, vermin, undead, etc. are all going to be pretty unimpressed by your pocket-watch-pendulum act. This reliance on mind-affecting effects is a defining weakness of the mesmerist class, and one that you should plan for both by abilities that allow your mind-affecting effects to function more reliably (e.g., the Psychic Inception bold stare improvement) or by purchasing a variety of spells that don’t feature the mind-affecting tag.
        Speaking of variety, you don’t have much of it. You have 34 abjuration spells, 27 conjuration spells, 66 divination spells, 178 enchantment spells, 14 evocation spells, 137 illusion spells, 49 necromancy spells, and 48 transmutation spells. If you added up all the abjuration, conjuration, divination, evocation, and transmutation spells, you’d still have only a few more spells than your total number of enchantment spells! I go into more detail on which schools of magic I think are most effective for mesmerists down in the Mesmerist Roles section (spoiler: it’s enchantment, illusion, and necromancy), but for now suffice it to say that there are advantages and disadvantages to having such a focused spell list. On the one hand, feats like Spell Focus that apply to only one school of magic are that much more powerful when so many of your spells come from that school, but on the other hand, you’re that much more screwed if you run into enemies who are either immune or highly resistant to your favored school. No matter how specialized you get in enchantment, illusion, necromancy, or, I don’t know, divination, if you’re a masochist, it’s worth remembering the classic investment principle of diversification. If you’re not diversified, there’s gonna come a time when some enemy (let’s be real, it’s probably going to be an ooze) straight-up eats your lunch; if you’re diversified, you stand a chance of adapting and overcoming. Nothing’s a guarantee in Pathfinder, but that advice generally won’t steer you wrong.
        Regarding spell save DCs, mesmerists are actually as strong as full casters (some would say stronger) when they’re able to get someone under the effects of their hypnotic stare and hit them with a Will save-based effect. If you think about it, even though mesmerists get only 6 levels of spells instead of 9, their hypnotic stare class feature shifts their effective spell save DCs up by 2, or by 3 once they hit 8th level. What this means on a practical level is that mesmerists cast spells ranging in power from 4th level to 9th level—even their weakest spells are still pretty dang strong. Toss in the Sluggishness bold stare, and you can add Reflex saves to your list of viable effects. (It should be mentioned, though, that you have far fewer Reflex save-based spells than Will save-based spells.) By the time you’ve finished adding Spell Focus, Greater Spell Focus, racial increases to spell save DCs, etc., mesmerists can make truly fearsome offensive spellcasters. That spellcasting supremacy is predicated on the assumption that you’ve got someone affected by your hypnotic stare, however, which means you’re relegated to single targets only, you must be able to affect them with mind-affecting effects (Psychic Inception, Psychic Inception, Psychic Inception…), and you must stay relatively close to the target in order to maintain your hypnotic stare. Satisfy all those constraints, and mesmerists are every bit as powerful as full casters.
