# Combat Roles

Combat Roles


        “Combat roles” refers to something that every class needs to figure out: how am I going to deal damage in combat? Full casters can often get away without any reliable means of dealing damage in combat, provided that they can offer enough buffing, debuffing, summoning, battlefield control, etc. to support the team anyway, but ¾-BAB ⅔ casters must often juggle twin mandates: deal effective damage, and offer spellcasting or skill functionality outside of combat. Much of a class’ suitedness to certain combat roles is decided by their weapon and armor proficiencies, as well as—in the case of ¾-BAB classes—their ability to self-buff before the combat is nearly over. We’re going to spend this next section discussing where mesmerists naturally fit, and brainstorm some avenues for covering your weaknesses.




Melee (Strength)


        Strength-based melee builds are often considered the bog-standard melee combat builds, and I’ll be honest: mesmerists are pretty much hot garbage in this arena. The base mesmerist class is proficient with light armor only, which means that single-class mesmerists will need to pump their Dexterity at point buy in order to achieve an acceptable AC for the early levels; if they then want a halfway decent Charisma stat and a Constitution score that won’t cause them to die in the face of a light breeze, they can’t afford to also prioritize Strength. Compounding this issue is the mesmerist’s generally poor weapon selection—simple weapons plus sap, hand crossbow, sword cane, and whip doesn’t exactly scream “melee blender.” So what’s the solution? Quite simply, you must multiclass. Paladin 2, fighter 1, and slayer 2 are all decent options for a melee mesmerist, but I’m a huge fan of the paladin dip, for a number of reasons: first and foremost, divine grace is incredible, and while it doesn’t double-stack with towering ego, it can supersede towering ego even when you’ve had your emotion components blocked. Take this dip, and you’ll almost never fail a save. That’s valuable. Paladin 2 also gives you a 1/day smite evil, medium/heavy armor proficiency, proficiency with martial weapons, better Fortitude saves, better HP, and more. If you take the Magical Knack trait, you can nullify the hit to your caster level, ensuring that the only penalty you take is slightly delayed spells and class features. Irrespective of which avenue you take to get to your Strength-based melee mesmerist, you’re likely to be a terror on the battlefield: heavily armored, wielding a greatsword or greataxe, able to eliminate status conditions on yourself (via touch treatment) as a swift action, pulling out implanted tricks, self-buffing with spells, etc. It’s a fun role, but not one that the mesmerist class can just stumble into: it takes some planning.




Melee (Dexterity)


        Even a casual glance at the mesmerist class will tell you that this was clearly the role that Paizo designed mesmerists around. Dexterity-based melee builds always involve high Dexterity scores, light armor, and a weapon used with the Weapon Finesse feat or the agile enchantment; certain weapons also have [Weapon] Grace feats that allow you to add your Dexterity modifier to damage—Fencing Grace for rapiers, Slashing Grace for light or one-handed slashing weapons, Starry Grace for starknives, Dervish Dance for scimitars, Bladed Brush + Slashing Grace for glaives, etc. Unfortunately, as a ¾-BAB class with no bonus feats, mesmerists are chronically crunched in their builds, making the three to four feats you’d need to spend on Weapon Finesse + Weapon Focus + [Weapon] Grace a bit hard to stomach. After all, you also have spellcasting priorities in Combat Casting, Spell Focus + Greater, Spell Penetration + Greater, as well as feat priorities for your stares in Compounded Pain, Intense Pain, Manifold Stare, etc., all of which must be attended to in order for you to reach your full potential. So what’s the play? Well, you have two potential options. First, you can multiclass again. Swashbuckler 1 and unchained rogue 3 are your best bets; each will kickstart a Dexterity-based combat build, although each also costs you some progression in your primary mesmerist class. Your second option is to simply ignore Dexterity to damage, at least through feat investment. That’s right! You can ignore Dexterity to damage if you want to—most of a mesmerist’s damage will come from painful stare + Intense Pain + Manifold Stare anyway, so if you want to ignore Weapon Focus and the [Weapon] Grace feats until you can save up enough scratch for an agile weapon, that’s a perfectly acceptable route to take. The downside to this route is that single-class, Dexterity-based mesmerists will be left with pretty poor weapon options. Sword canes, daggers, and sickles will probably be about all you can muster.
        One special playstyle that deserves some mention in the Melee (Dexterity) category is the whip playstyle. Although whips are no easier on feat investment than any other Weapon Finesse build—Weapon Finesse + Weapon Focus (Whip) + Whip Mastery will be the absolute minimum you’d want to consider, and Improved Whip Mastery is great to have if you can spare the feat—they threaten a wider area and can be quite useful for builds that focus on attacks of opportunity with Combat Reflexes. Although longspears and other reach weapons are possible in Strength-based melee builds, whips are about as close as Dexterity-based melee mesmerists will ever come to “reach.”




Ranged (Dexterity)


        Ranged mesmerist builds are also quite hard to build, again because of feats, dirty feats. Since the base mesmerist class’ only viable ranged weapons are crossbows, you have to take all the usual ranged combat feats (Point-Blank Shot + Precise Shot + Rapid Shot, plus Clustered Shots and Improved Precise Shot later) and feats for reloading crossbows faster (Rapid Reload, plus potentially Crossbow Mastery if you’re wielding a heavy crossbow or want to stop provoking attacks of opportunity for your reloads) unless you’re able to snag bonus weapon proficiencies from your racial selection. For a class with no bonus feats, the four to seven feats you need to piece together a convincing ranged build are...intimidating. And in all honesty, I’m not sure it’s worth it! Unlike rogues or inquisitors, who can multiply their sneak attack and bane damage the more times they hit an enemy (one of the most attractive features of Rapid Shot), all mesmerists are limited in the number of times they can deal their painful stare damage based on how many times they’ve taken Manifold Stare, a level-gated feat that will never allow them to deal painful stare damage more than four times per round. Not to mention that hypnotic stare and all of your bold stare improvements cease to function if you ever move more than 30 feet from an enemy! Doesn’t exactly inspire you with the confidence to build a ranged mesmerist, right? It can be done, of course, but it’s also going to require some multiclassing, my suggestions for which are down in the dipping section.
