# Dealing Damage

Dealing Damage


Let’s start with a core question for any d8 HD, ¾-BAB, ⅔ spellcasting class: how are you going to deal damage? Variability among mesmerist builds exists, and it is possible to build a Strength-based mesmerist if you make some smart multiclassing choices, but for the most part, mesmerists should plan to deal most of their damage in melee range with light weapons and Weapon Finesse. With only light armor proficiency, single-class mesmerists often have to consider Dexterity builds as their first choices in order to maintain acceptable AC values, but the 30-foot range limitation on hypnotic stare, one of their key debuffs, prevents them from falling too far back out of a fight (as, say, a ranged combatant) unless they’re willing to give up a significant portion of their debuffing power or invest heavily in feats that extend hypnotic stare’s range. For any mesmerist, however, whether Strength-based melee, Dexterity-based melee, or ranged, the class can expect to deal the lion’s share of its damage not through static bonuses to damage such as weapon training (fighter), studied target (slayer), smite evil (paladin), or favored enemy (ranger), but through painful stare, an ability that lets them tag on a pool of precision damage d6s to any hit the mesmerist lands on an enemy. The closest analog to painful stare is sneak attack, but where sneak attack scales up to 10d6 damage by 20th level and can keep on chugging along no matter how many times a rogue hits an enemy in a round, painful stare can—at base—deal only 6d6+10 damage at 20th level...and only once per round. Lacking meaningful ways to buff their damage through spellcasting, mesmerists therefore need to focus on four components if they want their damage output to remain relevant: 1) increasing painful stare damage, so that each hit hurts more; 2) increasing the number of times per round that painful stare can be triggered; 3) increasing the number of attacks the mesmerist can make, as painful stares triggered by allies’ attacks deal far less damage than painful stares triggered by the mesmerist’s own attacks; and 4) circumventing precision damage immunities so that enemies cannot escape your hungry eyes.
Barring favored class bonuses, Problem #1 (increasing painful stare damage) can be solved in precisely one way: the Intense Pain feat, which comes online for single-class mesmerists at 7th level. Intense Pain will increase the painful stare damage your mesmerist PC deals by about 33% over the base ability, and should essentially be your go-to Stare feat once you acquire it. This feat brings your raw damage on single hits to levels comparable with the rogue—although I think we can do a little better than that, don’t you? To deal with our damage output on full-attack actions, we’re going to need to trigger painful stare more than once per round, and that leads us to Problem #2 (triggering painful stare multiple times per round). You’ll solve this problem through the Manifold Stare feat, which you’ll take three times in order to trigger painful stare on every iterative attack (+15/+10/+5) plus the additional attack you receive through common spellcasting buffs. Manifold Stare acts as a force multiplier on Intense Pain, ensuring that we can get in and get ours on each and every full-attack. Now, can you reasonably expect to hit every round for four attacks? No, of course not. But that’s no reason not to plan for it! Some rounds you will hit four times, and you want all four of those attacks to deal as much damage as possible. And if you miss, well, you’ll never regret being able to trigger a Stare feat on an ally’s attack, although Blinding Stare or Confusing Stare become much more attractive choices than Intense Pain when you’re not dealing full sneak attack-level damage. Problem #3 (increasing attacks per round) can be solved easily with common team buffs like haste, channel vigor, or blessing of fervor. Overall, you don’t need to worry much about acquiring extra attacks—between your iteratives acquired through BAB progression and buffs floating around, you’ll generally have to plan more for Problem #2 than Problem #3. There’s no particular reason to drive hard toward other common bonus attacks like Rapid Shot, either, because you’re constrained by the 3rd/9th/15th level Manifold Stare feat progression. Unless you have more painful stare triggers left for the round, any addition attacks will deal piddly damage—you’re not like an inquisitor, where every additional attack stacks greater bane damage ad infinitum. Problem #4 (dealing with precision damage immunity) is...probably difficult. The Psychic Inception bold stare is the biggest single purchase you can make to ensure that painful stare works, as enemies immune to mind-affecting effects are immune to hypnotic stare, and therefore immune to painful stare, as well. “Psychic Inception is a mandatory bold stare improvement for mesmerists” isn’t exactly a hot take, but it’s non-controversial for a reason. The Anatomical Savant feat lets you ignore some percentage of sneak attack immunity, although that feat’s text doesn’t mention precision damage generally, only sneak attack—some GMs might rule that painful stare damage doesn’t qualify. Shadow Strike lets you deal precision damage to creatures with concealment, which you’d be well advised to take if you’re focusing on dealing damage as a mesmerist. Keeping a cheap +1 ghost touch dagger on your person would also be a good idea for dealing with incorporeals. Unlike the rogue, however, you don’t have to flank, blind, demoralize, or attack from Stealth or invisibility in order to deal your precision damage, and in practical terms that will mean that you deal it a lot more consistently than a rogue. A victory for Upfish!
