# Dipping To Mesmerist

Dipping To Mesmerist


        The mesmerist has a lot to offer as a dip, although where it really shines is as a dip for Charisma-based martial classes. Vigilantes, bloodragers, ninjas, rogues, paladins, antipaladins, cavaliers, samurai, swashbucklers—these classes are often in desperate need of ways to contribute to the team outside of damage, and mesmerist 2 will more than do the trick. Consummate liar is nice for feint-based classes like the swashbuckler; hypnotic stare helps soften up strong targets for allied spellcasters without noticeably cramping your action economy; mesmerist tricks can be used as powerful defensive options for you or allies; painful stare is a decent little damage boost; towering ego is fantastic for basically any martial class, almost all of which have serious holes in their Will saves; and having access to a few 1st-level spells like hermean potential or ill omen can’t help but improve the class. Mesmerist 3 gives you touch treatment, which you’ll probably be most interested in using on yourself as a swift action in order to strip away inconvenient status conditions, as well as a bold stare improvement that you’d likely use to purchase Disorientation or Sapped Magic.
Although it’s a bit less opportune, mesmerist 2 can also be used for Charisma-based casting classes. The opportunity cost of slower access to higher-level spells needs to be weighed carefully for classes like oracle or sorcerer, but if you’re willing to take the plunge, mesmerist 2 grants better BAB and Reflex saves, a few mesmerist tricks, a little bit of painful stare damage, towering ego—a huge bonus for any Charisma-based casting class—and hypnotic stare, which can greatly improve your ability to land single-target debuffs. For classes that want to focus exclusively on mind-affecting effects in a campaign rife with immune enemies, you can also push into mesmerist 3 for the Psychic Inception bold stare improvement. It’s not foolproof, but it will at least allow your hypnotic stare to always work on enemies that are immune to mind-affecting effects, and it’ll give your mind-affecting spells a 50% chance of working. Better than nothing, hey?
