# Full Martials

Full Martials


        We’re just going to move alphabetically down the list, starting with barbarian. As much as I love the idea of something like a gestalt barbarian/hatemonger mesmerist, one of the main stipulations of the rage class feature is that you can’t use “any ability that requires patience or concentration,” which most people interpret as including spellcasting with concentration components, concentration checks of any kind, etc. Barbarian would be a match made in heaven otherwise—mesmerist shores up the Will save and grants a lot of versatility, and barbarian shores up the Fortitude save, BAB, and defensive staying power. Probably the better choice is bloodrager, which does many of the same things as barbarian while also allowing you to continue casting spells. Cavalier/samurai is okay, but if you’re going to go with a heavily armored mesmerist who rides a mount, why not paladin instead? Smite evil can easily become more powerful than challenge, you get divine health, fear immunity, and lay on hands + mercies, and there aren’t any differences in their saves, BAB, HD, or weapon and armor proficiencies. 
Fighter is another obvious choice for gestalt games. You’ve got armor and weapon training options, strong Fortitude save progression and full BAB, plus all the bonus combat feats you could shake a stick at. Fighter is particularly good if you want to build a demoralization machine, as they can qualify for all the goodies like Dazzling Display, Violent Display, Disheartening Display, Gory Finish, Dreadful Carnage, etc. without too much trouble while focusing their odd-level feats on all the usual mesmerist suspects. Bold stares, painful stare feats, and debuffing spells make fighter/mesmerist gestalts incredibly tough combatants to take down. Scaled fist unchained monks and brawlers each bring their own strengths to the table for unarmed strike builds, but I’m partial to the brawler for martial flexibility, a class feature that you simply can’t beat if you have a good level of systems mastery. Ranger doesn’t have anything to offer us, with its Wisdom focus, but slayer definitely brings the boom with studied target, combat style feats, and scaling sneak attack damage that stacks with painful stare. Swashbuckler brings a little less to the table than I’d like, since it’s still a lightly armored striker class with a strong Reflex save; building a fighter or slayer with a swashbuckler feeling in mind would probably yield better results in the long run. Finally, there’s the avenger vigilante to consider. Vigilantes can be almost anything you want them to be, including full-BAB wrecking balls, and there’s so much synergy between the two classes that it’s impossible to ignore: concealing your identity with carefully crafted lies, using Intimidate to scare enemies witless, playing the game of psychological combat. Strong contender for purple.
