# Full Casters

Full Casters


        Starting once again at the top of the list, I really like arcanist/mesmerist pairings. You’d have to focus point buy on Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, and Charisma, leaving you somewhat strapped, but overall arcanists combine lots of things that are great about both the wizard and sorcerer classes while still allowing you to benefit from ¾ BAB, a d8 HD, better Reflex saves, and tons of debuffing options from your mesmerist side. Nice to have both psychic and arcane casting available, too—when you’re grappled, you cast mesmerist spells, and when you’re shaken, you cast arcanist spells. Cleric, druid, seducer witch, wizard, and psychic all have their strengths and weaknesses, but they’re mostly going to be too MAD to get much done—the exception being seducer witches, of course, which can become the premiere debuffers in the game through that unholy witch/mesmerist wombo combo. Sorcerer is a lot of fun, and doesn’t force you to prioritize Intelligence at all, unlike arcanist. You’d have to check a sorcerer guide for more information about bloodlines, however, because sorcerers and bloodragers are definitely not my strongest suit. The same could not be said for oracles, which I wrote a several-hundred-page guide on. Mysteries and revelations are extraordinarily powerful, and certain combos (shadow, whimsy, intrigue, etc.) would seem to fit the mesmerist class thematically as well as mechanically. Ready for my weirdest recommendation, though? Silksworn occultist. Although they’re not technically full casters, silksworn receive almost as many spells known and spells per day as sorcerers, and you get the enormous versatility of focus powers and silksworn eloquence to improve your face skills. A mesmerist/silksworn occultist would be the ultimate intrigue operator, and would never lack for non-spell combat options, between focus powers, mesmerist tricks, touch treatment, etc.
