# How’s the Action Economy?

How’s the Action Economy?


Pretty good, thanks very much! Classes generally need to be able to trigger their class features or spells as swift actions in order to be really competitive in the Pathfinder action economy—if everything you do takes a standard action, you’re going to be spending forever getting buffed, and the combat will be over by the time you start slaying in earnest. This is why classes like the occultist (which has basically zero self-buffing swift actions) have trouble compared with classes like the warpriest (swift action fervor), magus (swift action arcane pool), and paladin (swift action smite and lay on hands). But I’m happy to report that mesmerists are quite sleek in this regard. Most of your swift actions will probably be spent tagging enemies with hypnotic stare, since the ability has a tendency to break with enemy positioning, enemy death, or just new targeting priorities on your part; on rare occasions you may also wish to use touch treatment on yourself to eliminate a troublesome status condition. Your other abilities, however, including painful stare and many of your mesmerist tricks, are free actions that can be triggered even when it’s not your turn. How’s that for flexibility? Basically the only thing that mesmerists need their standard action for is spellcasting, and you should either be casting spells as an alpha strike to cripple minions or as a “kick ‘em while they’re down” tactic against a tough single target that you’ve already softened up a bit with hypnotic stare, bold stare, painful stare, and perhaps a trick or two. In either case, you should be 1) casting before others get a chance to act, or 2) casting once you’ve earned yourself a bit of a reprieve through other debuffing mechanisms. So enjoy that slim, sexy action economy, you stud.
