# Melee (Strength)

Melee (Strength)


   * Paladin 2 or Paladin 3 / Antipaladin 2: Paladin has an awful, awful lot to offer the mesmerist. For starters, we’ve got a d10 HD, full BAB, strong Fortitude and Will save progression, and access to shields, medium and heavy armor, and all martial weapons. Right off the bat, that’s a perfect setup for a Strength-based melee mesmerist. A 1/day smite evil isn’t awful, especially since the attack bonus scales with Charisma, rather than paladin level; lay on hands and at-will detect evil are also not bad, although lay on hands will stay perpetually weak with this dip. The real money in Paladin 2, though, is divine grace, which grants you a bonus equal to your Charisma modifier on all saves. If you build a paladin 2/mesmerist 2, you can easily have save bonuses of +9 (Fortitude: Base +3, Constitution +2, Charisma +4), +8 (Reflex: Base +3, Dexterity +1, Charisma +4), and +11 (Will: Base +6, Wisdom +1, Charisma +4 [Divine Grace]) by 4th level. If you’re willing to go even further into Paladin 3, you’ll get immunity to diseases and fear effects, the latter of which should be intensely interesting to any psychic spellcaster. The Riled mercy is also good for shutting down emotion effects. At any rate, this dip reigns supreme among mesmerist dips, especially for Strength-based mesmerists.
   * Fighter 1: A one-level fighter dip is great because it can be anything you want it to be: it can get you started on pretty much any combat style, it gives you some bonus BAB and Fortitude saves, and it shores up your armor and weapon proficiencies.
   * Iroran Paladin 1 / Scaled Fist UnMonk 1: Unarmed mesmerist builds are a bit wacky, but both of these dips play well with your Charisma modifier, and both give you some interesting tools.
   * Slayer 2: Another option for Strength-based melee mesmerists, slayer 2 gives you studied target, medium armor, bonuses to Fortitude and Reflex, and a slayer talent that should almost certainly be spent on a ranger combat style feat.
