# MES 151: Mesmerist Roles

MES 151: Mesmerist Roles


        It’s become customary in my guides for me to lay out the roles—both in-combat and out-of-combat—that Pathfinder classes can become great at. The mesmerist is a bit of an unusual class in that its combat role is very narrow, absent multiclassing, but it makes up for its general lack of combat punch with lots of spellcasting power and the ability to either pump up allies or debuff enemies through the floor. Mechanically, I like to think of the mesmerist as some kind of bizarre cross-pollination of the bard, witch, and rogue classes: you’ve got the bard’s high Charisma modifier, buffing abilities, and face skills, the witch’s unlimited debuffing abilities (i.e., hypnotic stare, bold stare, and any of the stare feats that modify painful stare), and the rogue’s general weapon/armor proficiency set-up and ability to deal precision damage. Provided that you leverage your strengths appropriately (or multiclass prudently when you need to grab other classes’ strengths) the mesmerist can be a monstrously powerful class, but it also has lots of opportunities for mediocre builds. Additionally, because such a vast proportion of the mesmerist’s abilities involve either mind-affecting effects (45% of your spells are mind-affecting, and hypnotic stare is mind-affecting) or precision damage (which certain types of enemies are immune to) mesmerists are at the mercy of AP design more than other classes: if you’re in a campaign full of undead and haven’t taken the spirit walker archetype (heck, even if you have taken the spirit walker archetype) you’re going to have a bad time as a mesmerist, period. Mesmerists do best in intrigue games featuring a lot of humanoids, where their high Bluff scores, feinting prowess, and mind-affecting effects can be put to their best use. In general, the more exotic the enemies you expect to face, the less a mesmerist will be the right tool for the job. My two cents!
