# MES 251: Mesmerist Tricks

MES 251: Mesmerist Tricks


Beyond touch treatment and native spell slots, a mesmerist’s tricks are what really help them contribute to an adventuring team. Selecting tricks is a delicate process because, barring one favored class bonus from the freaking merfolk race, mesmerists will never gain more tricks than their base progression gives them. It therefore behooves you to consult carefully with your party about what their needs are: do they often find themselves failing saves, and if so, which ones? Do they tend to get targeted by some attacks, but not others? Are certain status conditions more crippling to them than others? Figuring out the answers to these questions will often involve a deeper dive into another class’ mechanics than you perhaps bargained for, but believe me, the effort pays off! When your party’s wizard gets grappled without freedom of movement active, that could very, very easily turn into a PC death or even a TPK, depending on the strength of the wizard and the strength of the enemy. With Slip Bonds or Free In Body implanted in that ally, you can just whisk them out of harm’s way with a free action when it’s not even your turn. Or what about if your party’s barbarian is terminally susceptible to dominate person? Turning tail and running while Othmog the Unhinged gets that bloody glint in her eye is no one’s idea of a good time—but a quick stop at the Mental Fallback store ensures that that bad time stops before it even starts. Once you get to know your party and the tools they need on a regular basis, mesmerist tricks are some of the funnest “I veto your reality and substitute my own” powers. Heck, your GM’s facial expression when you act as bait for an enemy, then Spatial Switch yourself with your most lethal melee ally is worth the price of admission alone.
