# Painful Stare

Painful Stare


Manifold Stare: Manifold Stare allows you to trigger your painful stare class feature more than once per round, and I’m going to go on record as saying that I think it’s the single most important feat for mesmerists to take. Yes, more than Intense Pain, and yes, more than Compounded Pain. My reasoning for this opinion is that mesmerists are simply not built to deal damage with their abilities: their weapon proficiencies are extremely limited; they basically have to wear light or medium armor, which locks most mesmerists into Dexterity builds that deal less damage than Strength builds; they don’t get any intrinsic bonuses to attack or damage rolls; their spell list isn’t well-suited to self-buffing; and they don’t have the BAB to use Power Attack, Piranha Strike, or Deadly Aim very effectively. So what’s a mesmerist to do? The simple answer is to rely on your painful stare class feature, which deals scaling precision damage on each hit against a foe, whether you’re doing the hitting or not. At 20th level, a mesmerist using Intense Pain can deal 9d6+10 precision damage on one hit; at that point, however, you’ll have two other iterative attacks—not to mention haste—and by default mesmerists can only deal their painful stare damage once per round. With each instance of Manifold Stare, however, you get the chance at an extra 9d6+10 precision damage, for a maximum of 36d6+40 with three feats invested. Or what about Blinding Stare and Confusing Stare? Oh, sure, enemies might pass their saves the first time around, but what about the second, third, and fourth attempts? Will they be so lucky then? All this to say: Manifold Stare is excellent whether you’re debuffing or dealing damage, and every mesmerist should take the full three feats at some point. My recommendation would be to grab the first around 5th level, then grab the next around 11th, and finally swap your 15th-level bold stare for the final instance. It’s a lot of investment, but it’s incredibly worth it.


Ability Focus (Painful Stare): While not technically a stare feat, Ability Focus does apply to painful stare—and what’s more, it appears to apply to the stare feats, which modify painful stare rather than acting as their own abilities. This being the case, a +2 to the save DC for a Compounded Pain Blinding Stare + Confusing Stare is incredibly potent.
Blinding Stare: Blinded is a phenomenally powerful status condition, and unlike many of the other stare feats, Blinding Stare allows you to affect the same enemy as many times as you want in 24 hours. Tied with Confusing Stare as the best debuffing stare feat.
Compounded Pain: Compounded Pain lets you add two Stare feat rider effects to your painful stare instead of one. It’s a late-game addition to the painful stare canon, but nevertheless a phenomenal ability, allowing you to deal more damage (Intense Pain + Penetrating Stare), debuff enemies even further (Blinding Stare + Confusing Stare), or some combination of the two. Essential for high-level mesmerists.
Confusing Stare: Oof, another incredibly hard-hitting debuffing stare. The fact that you get to pick which one of two d100 rolls you’d like enemies to take on the table further increases your chances of denying enemies the opportunity to act normally.
Intense Pain: Mesmerists are not known for being the most damaging class out there, but Intense Pain starts to turn the tables on that narrative, squeezing roughly 30% more damage out of painful stare over the course of your career. By 20th level, in fact, you’ll deal 9d6+10 precision damage with Intense Pain, which compares favorably with the rogue’s sneak attack progression, and with Compounded Pain + Manifold Stare, you can even start to deal rogue-like sneak attack damage on every hit if you want! This is how mesmerists were intended to deal damage, so plan to take Intense Pain, Compounded Pain, and Manifold Stare at some point in your development.


Disconcerting Stare: You can basically forget the Disable Device and Perception check penalties, although Perception penalties can be nice if you’re trying to sneak past someone. What you’re really here for is the 1-minute Reflex save penalty, which can be applied early in a battle and left to operate by itself. Paired with the Sluggishness bold stare, you can really tank monsters’ Reflex saves—and those already tend to be quite weak as CR tranches go by.
Excoriating Stare: As with Demoralizing Stare, how is this an 11th-level ability while Blinding and Confusing are only 7th? Anyway, sickened is a better status condition than shaken for a debuffer, so this isn’t totally wasted.


Bleeding Stare: The damage is pretty lackluster, which is unfortunate. Bleed effects are always nice sources of passive damage.
Demoralizing Stare: Real talk, though: how is Demoralizing Stare a higher-level feat than Blinding Stare or Confusing Stare? It makes no sense in the generally accepted meta of which status conditions are strongest. Anyway, you should have a number of ways to make people shaken through garden-variety Intimidate checks. No need to duplicate that here.
Fatiguing Stare: Fatigued is a mild status condition, and since it can’t ever progress to exhausted through this ability, I don’t think I need to give Fatiguing Stare a stellar rating.
Penetrating Stare: Naaah. I mean, okay, but naaah. Intense Pain is basically guaranteed to outperform Penetrating Stare in the long run, and against a wider variety of targets. About the only use for Penetrating Stare that I can think of is if you’re using the weaker, ally-triggered version of painful stare often—Intense Pain will not outperform Penetrating Stare then, at least not against targets with DR. I know which I prefer.
Perturbing Stare: You know what else denies enemies their Dexterity modifier to AC? The blinded condition. You know what causes the blinded condition? Blinding Stare. I suppose if you wanted to make an enemy with blindsight flat-footed? I’m not sure that niche case is worth a feat, though.
Venomous Stare: Between widespread poison immunities and sky-high Fortitude saves at 11th level and beyond, I doubt that Venomous Stare will do much for you, especially not when you can use it against a given enemy only once per day; I won’t deny that the ability damage is alluring, however.


Entwining Stare: Intended pretty much exclusively for monsters. PCs won’t often have the grab ability.
Overpowering Stare: This ability is basically a carbon copy of Confusing Stare, but way worse. Later entry (11th level, rather than 7th) and targets can’t be affected more than once per day. Nope! Just get Confusing Stare. Not like anyone is concerned about PFS-legal options anymore.
