# Strategy

Strategy


        What do you get when an ancient pharaoh who dabbled in demon worship makes a pact to persist into undeath as a shabti with psychic powers? This wacky build, I guess. We’re going to start off with two levels in antipaladin to acquire heavy armor proficiency, martial weapon proficiency, better saves, and unholy resilience, after which we’ll transition into spirit walker mesmerist before finally ending up in our destination prestige class as an evangelist of the demon lord Orcus—prince of undeath. The goal here is to make a hybrid combatant/spellcaster who can be accompanied into battle by legions of undead servitors, and who can affect those undead servitors (or undead enemies, since I created this build with campaigns like Tyrant’s Grasp or Carrion Crown in mind) with mind-affecting effects.
        Each of the three classes used in this build brings something different: antipaladin greatly increases the offensive and defensive capabilities of the build, shoring up save bonuses and allowing us to dump Dexterity in favor of heavy armor; the spirit walker archetype makes undead entirely viable targets for mind-affecting effects, in addition to granting us Command Undead and the mesmerist’s usual host of buffing and debuffing tools; and finally, the evangelist prestige class—which has a very low opportunity cost, thanks to the aligned class feature—gives us animate dead 1/day as a material component-free spell-like ability, not to mention incredible immunities and save bonuses against death effects, positive energy, negative energy, fatigue, exhaustion, nonlethal damage, disease, poison, paralysis, mind-affecting effects, stunning, ability damage, ability drain, and negative levels. Animating the dead using Orcus’ first divine boon is only one avenue of necromancy available to us, however; you can also use command undead from the spirit walker spell list and the spirit walker’s Command Undead bonus feat to transfer animated dead out of your animate dead HD pool and into other pools as needed—see Brewer’s Guide to Undeath for details on the various HD pools, and make sure to stock up on scrolls of desecrate. When you’re not commanding undead servitors to die for their master, you can wade into melee with a huge martial weapon, Power Attack, Intense Pain, and Manifold Stare, or else hang back and use bold stares and necromancy spells to further break down the competition. Ray of enfeeblement, howling agony, blindness/deafness, conditional curse, calamitous flailing, vampiric touch, fear, ray of exhaustion, major curse, enervation, unwilling shield, possession, and waves of exhaustion should be your workhorse spells for living targets, because somewhat ironically, Fortitude-based necromancy spells won’t work on undead targets. For undead targets, simply use the best enchantment spells! Why not? It’s not like they’re immune to your mind-affecting effects anymore…
________________
