# Tanking Hits

Tanking Hits


        Of course, no amount of offense in the world will help you out unless you survive long enough to bring that offense to bear, right? So we’ve got to think about defense, too. The mesmerist is an odd bird when it comes to defense in that it’s more lightly armored than some ⅔ spellcasting classes (occultist, inquisitor, warpriest, etc.) who get access to at least medium armor, if not heavy. As I mentioned above, single-class mesmerists are almost always going to be locked into Dexterity builds, which tend to have slightly lower AC numbers (at least at early levels) than heavy armor/shield builds. But AC, at least as far as the mesmerist class goes, is actually a bit of a misdirect on Paizo’s part, because the class’ defensive staying power doesn’t primarily come from buffing itself—it comes from debuffing enemies. Now, don’t mistake me: you should never underestimate the power of self-implanted mesmerist tricks and spells like displacement and mirror image to get you out of tight spots. Mesmeric Mirror, Astounding Avoidance, and many other mesmerist tricks are almost purely defensive in nature, and can help you weasel out of soaking whatever stray blows make it to you. By and large, though, the mesmerist has to survive in melee range by reducing enemies into quivering piles of jelly before they get the chance to do any serious harm.
        At the core of this debuffing dynamo is hypnotic stare and the various bold stare improvements you get. Decimating an opponent’s Will save is the first step in landing a spell, offensive mesmerist trick, or painful stare rider effect that will further dismantle a foe, so activating hypnotic stare against the enemy who most threatens you is often the correct defensive tactic. Of course, you’ll need the Psychic Inception bold stare improvement so that you can affect all enemies equally with hypnotic stare, and the Disorientation bold stare improvement makes enemies less likely to hit you even if they’re trying really hard. After that come the fireworks, though: Stare feats such as Blinding Stare and Confusing Stare can be triggered as free actions when you trigger painful stare, and in later levels can even be combined with Compounded Pain; masterful tricks such as Cursed Sanction and Vision of Blood can hand out brutal debuffs; and your spell list is practically bursting at the seams with vicious penalties to foes’ ability to mount successful attacks against you. If you want an easy mnemonic to remember the the basic principles of how mesmerists should stay alive on the battlefield, just think: debuff to defend. Debuff to defend. Debuff to defend.
Against saving throws, mesmerists are actually remarkably hardy! Towering ego is a fantastic class feature that will keep you safe from any number of Will save-based spells and supernatural abilities, and the fact that it protects you from involuntarily losing the emotion components of your psychic spellcasting is just icing on the cake. The Sapped Magic bold stare also fits in with the mesmerist’s organizing principle of debuff to defend by dropping enemy spellcasters’ save DCs. On the trick side, Astounding Avoidance, Gift of Will, and Mental Fallback are all intended as anti-saving throw defenses, and even if you do fail a save, your touch treatment class feature can often shed any status conditions you might have acquired as a swift action, leaving you none the worse for wear. Mesmerists may not have many tools for dealing with Fortitude saves, but against Reflex or Will saves, they’re surprisingly one of the best-defended classes in the game.
So where does all this leave you on defense? Well, it’s fairly clear that mesmerists excel in fights against single targets. Remember, debuff to defend, and the most reliable tools that mesmerists have for that task are hypnotic stare and bold stares (single-target), painful stare rider effects (single-target), offensive mesmerist tricks (single-target), and spells (probably an even mix of single-target and AoE). Against single targets that are valid candidates for mind-affecting effects, there’s very little that mesmerists can’t survive, provided that they’ve been built competently; add even one extra enemy on the field, though, and all of a sudden the prognosis gets much bleaker. Mesmerists are therefore best served by responding decisively and unilaterally to remove minions from a fight so that they can focus all of their single-target debuffing on the biggest, baddest target. Color spray, synaptic pulse, confusion, fear, crushing despair, glitterdust, mass mydriatic spontaneity, mass synesthesia, greater song of discord...the mesmerist spell list is set up for AoE debuffing if you do it right, but you need to act immediately in an encounter so that you can concentrate on what’s important in the room: the boss.
