# 1 - 6 Psychic Spellcasting

1 - 6 Psychic Spellcasting
        If your phantom represents 50% of your strength, your spellcasting represents the next 30-40%.  Your spell list is surprisingly deep for a 1-6 caster, and psychic magic has lots of nice perks (no verbal or somatic components, ever!).  Your spell list contains offensive and defensive buffs for yourself, your allies, and your phantom, as well as lots of solid debuff and fear spells, most of them from the necromancy school.  If the Mesmerist is the occult version of 3.5’s Beguiler, the Spiritualist is channeling the Dread Necromancer in many ways.
        Like all 1-6 casters, your main struggle will be rationing your modest daily allotment of spells.  As a psychic caster, you’ll need to defend against negative emotions and fear that can disrupt your emotion components.  Thankfully, with your phantom riding around inside your head, you’ll be more resistant to these threats than most other psychic casters.


For Those Unfamiliar with Psychic Spellcasting: Psychic spellcasting has no verbal components - you don’t need to say fancy words to cast, you can cast fine in an area of silence, being deafened doesn’t affect spellcasting, etc. - and no somatic components - you don’t have to wave your hands around, it’s not affected by arcane spell failure on armor, you can cast while pinned, etc.

Instead, your spells can have thought and emotion components. If a spell has a thought component, any concentration check has its DC increased by 10 unless you spend a move action to negate this increase. If a spell has an emotion component, it can’t be cast while suffering from a negative [emotion] effect (such as fear). This is why it’s important to have a way to remove and prevent emotion effects (such as Logical Spell+remove fear) as a psychic caster.


Phantom
        Like the summoner’s eidolon or the hunter’s animal companion, this is the reason you’re probably playing a spiritualist.  You get your own personal ghost buddy!  How cool is that?  The phantom is closer to an eidolon than an animal companion, but comes with its own slew of strange and unique abilities.  Your phantom can exist in multiple states, whether it be ectoplasmic, incorporeal, or hiding inside your consciousness.  It can serve as a fighter, a bodyguard, a tank, or a mobile debuff with its own actions and initiative.
        Like all ‘buddy classes,’ the phantom instantly makes the spiritualist more complex than its compatriots.  It pays to know what you’re doing, since you’ll be taking up twice as much time at the table when it comes to combat (and leveling up).  Thankfully, aside from picking feats, skills, and emotional focus, your phantom’s progression and mechanics will prove relatively straightforward.  You won’t have to worry about juggling evolution points or picking new tricks for your Handle Animal skill. It’s worth noting that you don’t have access to a Resilient Eidolon-style feat - once you’re down, your phantom is gone, barring some emotional focus-specific abilities (like Zeal’s Steadfast Servant ability).
        It should be repeatedly noted that your phantom cannot wear armor or wield weapons, and any magic items you place on it fall off if you move it into your consciousness.  Like an eidolon, you share item slots with your phantom; for example, if you’re wearing a magic ring and your phantom’s wearing another magic ring, neither of you could benefit from a second ring.  If you seek to equip your phantom with gear, it’s going to require a bit more juggling as your buddy phases in and out of existence. Feel free to deck your phantom out if it’s staying summoned all day, though.
