# Base Shaman Hexes

Base Shaman Hexes
Ah yes the neato little ability you stole form the witch that you have made your own! You get one hex every even level, though you don’t get access to Major or Grand hexes inherently, and using a hex is a standard action that does not provoke an AoO with a DC of 10 + ½ Shaman Level + Wisdom Modifier unless otherwise stated! What's important to know is that there are plenty of hexes that aren’t level dependent, or provide really unique utility, so you don’t have to just think about them as debuff tools or new ways to attack!


Alright we good? Great. Lets get into it.


* (✰5/5✰) Chant (Su) Are you planning on taking the evil eye, fortune or misfortune hex? Definitely? Great, then you will be taking this permanently. Not doing that? Then you probably don’t care about it. That said, it extends the duration of some of the best hexes in the game, so your probably want it.
* (2/5 ) Charm (Su): Eh at level 8 this MIGHT be considerable but its still not as good as charm person. Not something that I’d take permanently, but might be good to pick up for a diplomacy problem or two.
* (1/5 ) Draconic Resilience (Ex): Immunity to sleep and paralysis! This only last for a few rounds, so its good if you are going up against a monster that makes this a problem but I wouldn’t burn a permanent slot on it.
* (✰5/5✰) Evil Eye (Su): Will Save or take a -2 to -4 to anything…for more than one round. If you make your save it only lasts one round…unless they have chant. Which of course you will. Great way to absolutely ruin someone's day, and there is a reason we stole it from the witch. It’s not bad to pick up temporarily but you get a lot more use out of it by just having it forever.
* (4/5) Fetish (Ex): Get an item creation feat but better! Its the best item creation feat, which is great, and if you use wandering hex you can pick it up for as long as you need and not have to keep it in your set because it lasts 24 hours. Really, if you want to build, around building or just want to pick it up for a little, this is a great option!
* (5/5) Fortune (Su): So this is an AMAZING buff. Getting a free reroll once per round is incredibly good as you can use it on an attack, a save, an ability check, whatever! Its also only worth it if you have chant…you did take chant permanently didn’t you?
* (4/5) Fury (Su): Hey give someone a little morale bonus to attack rolls for a good amount of rounds! It applies to all of them, and unless you have a very prolific bard, this will basically help everyone. It’s not even that bad to pick up temporarily because it still lasts round equal to your shaman level! 
* (4/5) Healing (Su): So at low levels, having a low level 1/day cure light wounds is nice, but not great if you can only do it once a day…that said it gets much better if you have access to hex vulnerability, which basically gets us access to infinite out of combat healing so long as you have spell slots :D. Current rating is so high because well…its on our spell list so if we want it, we CAN prepare it. And you should. Assume it goes down a fair bit if you don’t have it prepared.
* (3/5 ) Intimidating Display (Su): So while I dont like burning my entire turn, a full round action to demoralize everyone ain’t bad, especially if you can do it well. Thats a -2 on saved for anyone who is affected, and we have some good SOS. That said, we probably have other ways to ruin people.
* (✰5/5✰) Misfortune (Su): Do you want someone to be bad at EVERYTHING???? Then you use this. Hit them with an Evil Eye, given them a huge penalty and then hit them with misfortune and watch them fumble every single thing while you chant ominously in the background. If you don’t have both chant and evil eye online? Not nearly as useful, so it works best as part of a permanent set.
* (4/5) (TH - 5/5) Secret (Su): Do you know what's better than getting a free metamagic feat? Having a swap in metamagic feat that you can change depending on what you need. One of the best uses of ritual hex.
* (4/5) Shapeshift (Su): Cute trick that can get you access to effectively  lesser Wild Shape. Lots of little utility things you can pull off with this, just don’t try to throw down in combat with it if you can avoid it.
* (3.5/5) Silkstring Snare (Su): Spiderman hand fwip! Reflex save or have one person be entangled AND unable to move from their square! Now they can’t be affected by this a second time, which blows, but it seems like a good enough trick to ruin someone’s day and let your melee’s wail on them. Especially good on spellcasters without teleportation access.
* (3.5/5) Tongues (Su): So we actually already have this as a spell? For some reason we can only pick up the spell at level 7! That said, tongues is a really good ability and getting mutliuse tongues that is only limited by minutes per level gets rid of a problem so…Not a bad pickup in my mind at all!
* (3/5) Ward (Su): So a bonus to ac and saves is good…BUT its a deflection bonus to ac, and resistance bonus to saves, which at mid-high levels, you’ll have items that do it better. Still, its one of the few buff hexes that doesnt have a per day limit, so I guess that's fine.
* (3/5) Wings (Su): Worst flight hex. Why? Well because you don’t get flying until 7th level (by which point you could just cast fly) and when you DO get it you have to land every time ooorr you just start falling. Good for getting to high places, but not much more, even if your have a really long duration.
* (5/5) Witch Hex (Su): At base, getting access to witch hexes is pretty damn neat though its rating is usually based around whichever hex you choose. That you can only choose one…IF you take it permanently. That said, the only way to cheese it is with ritual hex. Still its a good pick up regardless.
