# Class Features

Class Features
* (6/5) Spellcasting [0-9, Divine, Prepared]*: Look, let's level. Your spell list? Ain't the best…but you are still a divine caster who knows EVERY SPELL ON THEIR LIST and can prepare any of them any day, in whichever configuration you want. Really, the shaman spell list is basically the shamans WORST drawback…and we have WAY too many ways of getting around it. Seriously, no matter what you say, this is still a fullcaster with some good spells, and that's all it needs to get a great place. Not to mention you are a WISDOM based caster, so that will save and perception is about to be REAL nice.
   * Spellcasting Properties: Because every guide is somebody's first, I’ll go over what all of this means in a little more detail:
      * Prepared: We basically can choose which spells we want to be able to cast every day. We have to prepare these spells ahead of time by spending an hour to commune with our spirit animal. This is especially useful because we can choose ANY spell from our spell list, meaning that we have the full variety of our entire list at our disposal.
      * Divine: Our casting draws itself from mystical sources, which means for some reason it doesn't take arcane spell failure chance AND we can use divine foci for a lot of our spells.
      * Fullcaster: WOOO we love this, this gives us a hilarious amount of spells to work with, gives us more options than what we know what to do with, and lets us pull some absolutely hilarious tricks later on.
      * Shaman Spell List: Our main weakness is our spell list. Most of our good spells what it does have are stolen from the druid, and witch. Which means anything that allows us to get better spells from other spell lists is VERY valuable, as it helps us cover our SOLE major weakness as a casting class, taking our spellcasting into hilarious levels of power again.
   * Which spells are good?: I will noooot be doing a spell list review for the shaman because you can pick any spell and you are a prepared caster. Spontaneous casters are limited and will die if they make the wrong choice. You will not. Have fun, try things.
* (?/5) Spirit (Su): WE’RE GOING GHOST!!!! This is effectively your Mystery/Domain/Arcane School pick which gives you access to spells to use with your Spirit Magic feature, additional Hex options, nifty powers for your familiar, AND nifty manifestation powers for you!!! Neat, helpful and it only gets SILLIER when the wandering spirit gets involved. That said, not all spirits are equal!!!
* (5/5) Spirit Animal (Ex): OUR SUPER FAMILIAR! Despite the name, your spirit animal doesn't HAVE to be an animal. Also, no matter what you pick, it does count as an outsider for the spells and abilities that affect it that are limited by type (like enlarge person). This doesn’t seem to invalidate any vulnerabilities GRANTED by a type, just means if something baps outsiders specifically, your little guy counts. Which is important, because if this guy dies, you can’t prepare spells!!! So you definitely want it to be someone who is easy to defend or that can defend itself!
   * Familiars: In general familiars are so useful that I decided to write a guide JUST on familiars.
   * Stacking Levels: Turns out any levels you take in ANOTHER class that provides a familiar stacks with shaman for the purposes of progressing shaman!
   * Deliver Touch Abilities: A spirit animal can deliver hexes as well as touch spells!
   * Spirit Abilities: Your familiar homie gets a neat power based around your spirit at level 1! We love our familiars here!
* (4.5/5) Spirit Magic: So you get spontaneous casting domain slots! Now you can only cast spells from your spirits in these slots, but hey they are free slots, need 0 preparation, and you just have them every day!! You get one per level you can cast (which means it scales with your spellcasting, which is important for prestige classes..)
* (5/5) Hex (Su): Hey remember the neato feature from the witch that basically is what helps it compete with the Wizard as an arcane caster? YEAH we get THAT!!! And all of the neat feats that go with it. Now we have to choose different hexes than the witch, and don’t get access to their entire library of’em BUTTTTT if we need to, we can still pick a few up. You also get MORE hex options based on your spirits!!!! VERY IMPORTANT FOR LATER!!!!
* (5/5) Wandering Spirit (Su): Whenever you prepare your spells after level 4, you can form a lesser bond with another spirit!!!!! YOOO THIS IS HUGE! You gain access to all of the spells of that spirit for the sake of which spells can be cast with spirit magic (which is dope), and get the base spirit ability. As you level up you get access to higher level spirit abilities!!!! This is where the shamans' godlike flexibility comes into play, giving you a whole new set of spells and abilities to work with every single morning.
* (5/5) Wandering Hex (Su): AND WE GET EVEN MORE POWERFUL as each morning you can choose a new hex from your main spirit OR your wandering spirit, meaning that you can get access to really unique abilities every single day! Moreover, you make choices for those new abilities each day as well, which makes you even better at doing everything. Honestly after we get this, we can happily multiclass/prestige out.
* Capstone: We get a few abilities that come online at level 20 BUTTT I wouldn’t consider them capstones as they aren’t just your level 20 class ability, they are the level 20 ability provided by your spirit choice or your wandering spirit. As such, gonna play it as if you just get to pick one of the below, like the cleric or Wizard.
   * (4/5) Arch Familiar (Su): You ever wanted your familiar to be able to cast miracle once a day? OR just have a small repository of buffs on hand? Very fun capstone though I don’t think it ungodly powerful.
   * (5/5) Hex Mastery (Su): Grand Hexes are no joke, and even picking up one can actually add some serious power!
   * (5/5) With This Sword (Ex): You gain a Noble Phantasm minor artifact!!! This is not only powerful, but also really really cool. Love that. Even cooler because you probably have a super holy avenger/unholy avenger by now.
   * (4/5) Won’t Stay Dead (Ex): Once per week, when you should lose, you don’t. 
   * (5/5) Perfect Body, Flawless Mind (Ex): Get 8 points that can be added to any ability score in any way. 5 to one, 3 to another. This is always helpful and people love free stats. Incredibly powerful option.
   * (5/5) The Boss (Ex): Get super leadership! Luckily everything else is so busted at this level, so this is fine.
________________
