# Hex Feats

Hex Feats 
* (3/5) Extra Hex: Get another hex! Normally I’d rate this higher, because hexes ARE your bread and butter…but you will probably have enough, especially since you don’t have nearly as wide a list as the witch. So if you just want to get your build up faster, or are multiclassing? Go for it. Otherwise, i don’t think it’s necessary but its nice to have.
* (3/5) Amplified Hex: Sacrifice spells to make your hexes a little bit more useful in several different ways! It isn’t much, but it’ll come in handy every now and then. Note that the cost gets kinda silly after a certain point so it might not be worth it.
* (4/5) Flexible Hex: Swap your wandering hex! This is just an added bit of flexibility on top of your already flexible class, but it can definitely be nice to hot swap during an emergency or when you need something you didn’t expect!
* (4/5) Spirit Talker: Lesser Wandering Hex! You get a hex of your choice for an hour, and in some situations that's all you need!!! You can use this as a way to pick up a hex you missed, or use a situational ability and then drop it without taking up your skills for the day. Sure it got nerfed but i still think its a very useful ability to have on you!
* (5/5) ✰Ritual Hex✰: Alright THIS is the big stuff. Now you’ll probably want to be lore or something adjacent because the knowledge checks ARE NO JOKE but if you build for it you can pass it. That said…this is basically EXTRA WANDERING HEX. Now there is some discrepancy on the wording of a hex which you qualify for, so my ruling is for base hexes, you can only choose something from the man shaman list or one of your spirits. THAT SAID for the major hex and grand hex, as those are ONLY available through the witches list, you can pick from the witch list for those (as it doesn’t seem to limit those like the base hexes). This is also one of the only ways for a shaman to pick up a major hex in my opinion so, we want this. We want this BAD.
* (5/5) Accursed Hex: SOOOOO many of your hexes are single target try once or fail for the rest of the day abilities and this helps you circumvent that for ALL of your hexes. If you plan on having any direct effect abilities, which you probably will, this is absolutely worth the pick up!!!
