# Metamagic Feats

Metamagic Feats
* (6/5) Sacred Geometry: Free metamagic. FREE METAMAGIC. Combined with the right metamagic feats, this ability is downright godly, the qualifications are dirt easy and you can make every spell unstoppable. Why don’t most people take it! Well all of that horrible math of course! If only someone had made an online easily accessible and useful calculator...hint...hint!
* (5/5) Spell Perfection: More free metamagic! Very late game, but its incredibly useful, and all that it asks from you is that you take more metamagic! Can do!!! (Also remember that it doubles ANY other feat based numerical bonuses. Caster level, DC, anything.) This is the capstone for any blaster
* (2-6/5) Ascendant Spell: Okay so basically, ascendant spell lets you cast a spell as its MYTHIC version which is...completely ridiculous. All mythic spells are just straight up better versions of the base spell, and getting access to them in non mythic games is great...or it would be if it didnt bring you up +5 spell levels. Damn. If only we had a way, that was relatively easy, to be able to use metamagic without raising the actual level of the spell! Then well this would be amazing wouldn’t it? Probably busted.
* (5/5) Cherry Blossom Spell: If a target takes damage from a spell (even if they succeed their save) They take 2 ABILITY DAMAGE to either all their mental or physical scoll. Not only is this thematic, you also have a bunch of spells that have ongoing damage effects that make this TERRIFYING. So long as your spell has a save, they don't get a fort save to negate it. Even for +3 spell levels, this is probably worth it. Imagine if we didn’t have to do that?
* (4/5) Extend Spell: Doubles your duration. Short sweet, gets the job done, great for long term buffs or other effects. Definitely worth picking up.
* (5/5) Quickened Spell: You are probably going to get a rod of this, because its sort of expensive BUT action economy is the name of the game. Being able to cast two spells in one round is ridiculously powerful, don’t forget it.
* (4/5) Dazing Spell: HAHAHA IF THEY TAKE DAMAGE FROM THE SPELL THEY ARE DAZED. DAZED. Dazed creatures can take no actions, completely removing potentially dozens of enemies from the board. Dazing fireball is classic for a reason, and honestly this is one of the best debuff tools in the game. Fucking terrifying.
* (4/5) Rime Spell: Ice spells entangle. Good cute debuff and you have plenty of ice spells, and if you dont you can steal them somehow I’m sure.
* (5/5) Studied Metamagic: Make a knowledge check. If you pass, you completely ignore the targets energy resistances or DR from its race...which is what most monsters have. Congrats, fireball now works on the fire elemental and everyone is very angry with you. Better for the wizard I think, but still great on you. BLASTERS YOU ARE PICKING THIS UP.
* (5/5) Empowered Spell: All numerical effects...ALL OF THEM are increased by 1.5. All of them. Thats damage dice, damage added, possibly creatures affected. It just says all. Go off I guess. Blasters, you are also taking this.
* (4/5) Maximized Spell: All variable numeric effects are maximized. Healing is maxed, damage is maxed yadda yadda.
* (5/5) Persistent Spell: Effectively roll twice and take the lowest for all saves involved with the spell. For a lot of later game spells, it’s save or be absolutely destroyed, so this can be an INCREDIBLY useful power to have. Incredibly. Very very worth picking up mid to late game.
* (4.5/5) Piercing Spell: Hey do you know that SR is the worst? Like the absolute worst? This makes your enemies SR count as being 5 lower and only raises your spell level by 1. This can and will save your ass at least once so it’s a good pick up...possibly better as a rod, but a good pickup nonetheless.
* (4/5) Reach Spell: There are a SURPRISING number of incredibly powerful touch spells, and while ya know, most of them you can deal with via spectral hand, once you get to level 10 or so you’ll definitely want to be able to cast some of your 5th or 6th level spells at a a range.


Item Creation Feats
* (5/5) Craft Wondrous Item: If you are going to get a feat, and you don’t know which to pick? Pick this one. This has one of the widest array of items, they are always helpful, AND you can ignore a lot of the pre-reqs so long as your skill checks are high enough.
* (6/5) Craft Fleshcrafting Poison: Stealing monster abilities is busted, and if you get away with this, then be grateful or very afraid of your GM. It is part of my uh recycle mage build
* (4/5) Craft Arms and Armor: So on its own it’s really good...for your team. Don’t get me wrong, there is armor you can wear and this will come in handy for that but in general, this will be a lot more useful for your party than for yourself.
   * (5-6/5) Craft Construct: So these can actually be SILLY powerful if you know how to use them. Constructs have some of the wildest cheese, from the Tiny God Homunculi to the Painter Wizard, this can get REALLY busted REALLY fast if your DM isn't paying attention.
      * Also never forget: “Once the crafting process is complete, the resulting construct is ready to receive orders. A construct recognizes its creator intuitively and obeys all commands issued to it by that individual.”
* (5/5) Inscribe Magical Tattoo: Basically allows you to make a second set of magical items but at a much higher cost. This is important because it lets you have two items in one slot...also come on, sexy super magic tattoo’s?.
* (3/5) Scribe Scroll: Lets you make scrolls of your spell list, and honestly? You have so many ways of abusing scrolls, you might as well pick it up. That said, without some cheese you generally won’t be as good as the wizard at this one.
* (6/5) Creating Magical Traps*: So technically this isn’t a magic item creation feat, and doesn’t really require a feat but these are basically in the same ballpark so I just wanted to let you know, magical traps are busted, expensive but busted, especially with automatic resets. You can basically have contingency whatever, and place multiple spells on one trap and so long as you can cast it, it’s gucci so just...yeah no this is dumb.
