# Class Overview & Chassis

Class Overview
So the paladin is a core class that gets both a lot of praise and frustration. It’s a fairly versatile healer, tank, damage dealer, and even has some support abilities to boot making them great classes to round out a party, held back by the nature of alignment in pathfinder. Antipaladin’s are no better, if not worse, having to be fucking bastards just to get by!!! 

This isn’t to say the classes aren’t useful. Quite the contrary of course. Just difficult. That said, when looking up information on how one might best play these classes I came upon a startling fact: Most of the guides are either outdated or broken. Yes, that's right. Just broken. I am not a paladin main myself, as you all know, I am mid to high caster all day every day, but I figured it wouldn’t be fair to leave my holy warriors hanging, especially since it seems like their following has been praying for so very long.

SOOO you and me, let’s try to make up for lost time and answer those prayers. Welcome to a cracked guide to crusading. Deus Vult.

In this guide I’ll be talking about how to optimize paladin to be the most helpful member of the party. If you want a guide to how one roleplay a anti/paladin’s code of conduct, well I have the guide for you.


How to Play a Anti/Paladin
Guide to Playing the Paladin
The Chassis
* (1/5) Alignment: Okay so you either HAVE To be Lawful Good or you HAVE to be Chaotic evil. There is no in between. There is not variance. More importantly, if you do ANYTHING to defy your alignment, you lose your class features. There are VERY specific rules on how you may act which is incredibly limiting, including who you can by RAW, who you can adventure with. I’ll probably have a section on this later, but honestly, you’ll be fighting with this more than you’ll be fighting enemies…and it doesn’t help that alignment is uh…sort of a shit show.
   * For Antipaladins: I would HIGHLY suggest looking into the god Hei Fang, who lets you still do good things, just for your own reasons. This’ll help you out A LOTTTTTTT
* (4/5) Hit Die - d10: Pretty god damn solid. This is the fighter hit dice and honestly will start the trend of “fighting with the fighter”. Anyway, it’ll super keep you alive but it isn’t beating out your barbarian.
* (5/5) BAB - FULL: It’s the best you can get! Remember, no matter what, you can ALWAYS come out swinging. Always! Go hard, and never be afraid to mix it up in a fight.
* (1/5) Skills - 2+INT: ANNDD here comes the ouchie ouch. You get NO skills basically and you have no reason to invest in INT so…good luck I guess???
   * Class Skills Worth Paying attention to:
      * [Paladin] Diplomacy (Cha): Being persuasive can be useful
      * [Antipaladn] Bluff (Cha): Lying can be useful.
      * [Antipaladin] Intimidate (Cha): This is actually a SUPER important skill for an antipaladin due to your fear aura. If you are able to max this out, you’ll be getting dragons to beg for your Mercy…which you cannot provide. It may take a few feats, but it’s very worth it.
      * Handle Animal (Cha): If you get a mount, which you probably should tbh, you are going to need this to teach it tricks. Otherwise? Skip.
      * Know. Religion (Int): Knowing your own religion is kinda useful huh.
   * Non Class Skills Worth Paying Attention To:
      * Know. All (Int): Knowing things is useful.
      * Perception (Wis): It is still the most rolled skill in the game and you probably want it so uh enjoy it. You always want to see things before they happen.
* (5/5) Saves - Fort and Will: Alright you have two out of three saves and the two saves that will almost definitely kill you instead of mostly kill you. HP damage from a fireball is one thing, getting nauseated or dominated is another!!! Still, it would be better if we had all three…
* (5/5) Weapon And Armor Proficiencies: Alright we get all martial weapons, all simple weapons, and all armor and shields besides tower shields. NOW…normally not getting access to tower shields would make this blue…bUTTTT its a lot easier to get around weapon proficiencies than it is to get a higher hit die or another good save. I say this is more than enough to get you anything you need.
Class Features
* (?/5) Aura (Ex): Alright if you are good this is an aura of good. If you are evil, this is evil. You don’t really have the spells to take advantage of sacred summons so…this is a whatever ability to you. Mostly flavor. But like…you have it…I guess?
* Detect Good/Evil (Sp):  So as a move action, at-will, you can check if an individual person or item with 60 feet has an aura, as the spells well….Detect Good or Evil, depending on whether you are a paladin or antipaladin. Both of these give you generally vague information about how dangerous something or someone is, but ya know, information is useful.
   * (3/5) [Paladin] Detect Evil: This ability kinda gets to the crux of the issue between these two classes, as you will most likely be fighting and finding a lot more evil things. 
   * (2/5) [Antipaladin] Detect Good: Less good because again, less often you’ll be going up against super good objects or opponent. Goes up one in an evil campaign.
* Smite Evil/Good (Su): So you either target an Evil (Paladin) or Good (Anti-paladin) creature as a swift action. That person? You now have the ultimate beef with that person. You get your charisma to attack rolls and AC (as a deflection bonus) and automatically bypass ANY DR the creature may have which is HUGE. ON TOP OF ALL OF THAT, you add your level to damage if they are just aligned good or evil. This is an INSANE boost that lasts UNTIL THE TARGET FUCKING DIES, or the next time you nap. 

So what’s the catch? You don’t get many uses of it…at all. You get it at MAX, 7 times per day at level 19. Early on you are going to need to hoard it…don’t. This is your ICONIC ability, your right as a warrior of your cause. If you see something that looks even a little tanky and evil? Break it over your god's knee.
   * (5/5) [Paladin] Smite Evil: You will be fighting evil creatures…all of the time. Elementals. Fey. Dragons. Undead (which do count and you deal double damage to). Seriously, you will have plenty of time to use this and as you get later and later into the game, more and more enemies become super mega evil.
   * (1/5) [Antipaladin] Smite Good: So…don’t kill me but im rating this for a normal campaign where you are with a normal crew…and as the game goes on, fewer and fewer creatures are good, and if you don’t SPECIFICALLY target a good creature, it just doesn’t work at all. It’s still an amazing boost when it comes up but like…again that’ll be super rare.
   * Obviously ratings are reversed if for some reason you are fighting good people, like ya know, usually the player party.
   * (6/5) Divine Grace/Unholy Resilience (Su): Holy cheese and fucking crackers. Getting your ENTIRE charisma bonus to saves…all of the time? That’s MASSIVE. So massive in fact that this alone makes you one of the most dippable classes in all of pathfinder, because this is just so good. This is against extraordinary abilities, supernatural, spells. Everything. You can START with a +5 bonus to all saves. At level 2. That is fucking insane. It is just as iconic as smite and honestly? You’ll get more use out of it. 
   * Lay on Hands/Corrupting Touch (Su): ALRIGHT. As a standard action ½+Cha mod times per day, you can hit people with a melee touch attack that doesn’t provoke an attack of opportunity. This either does 1d6 healing or damage for every 2 paladin levels, so its nice. Technically, for the sake of pre-reqs, these are the same ability, so anything that affects one? Affects the other. These are also the tools you will use to apply your Mercies and Cruelties
   * (5/5) [Paladin] Lay on Hands: Heals 1d6 damage per even level (or does the same damage to undead)! What makes it better, significantly so in fact, is that the paladin can heal THEMSELVES as a swift action, meaning that you can affect yourself with any mercies you like, while full attacking your brains out. It’s also an important part of the legendary healer, the Oradin. This is THE in-combat healing trick.
   * (3/5) [Anti-Paladin] Touch of Corruption:* Deal 1d6 damage per even level (or heals the same amount for undead). NOW here’s the deal, while we always want more damage, fitting in a melee touch attack isn’t ideal. It isn’t like sneak attack, which you can just throw on top of any attack. BUTTT this be comes massively more useful when used in conjunction with a conductive weapon, which brings the rating up to a solid murder option.
   * Aura of Courage/Cowardice (Su): Okay now we get into our first aura abilities!!! Both aura’s have a radius of 10 feet around the paladin or antipaladin, that is effectively constant so long as the champion is conscious or not.
   * (3.5) [Paladin] Aura of Courage: Okay you the paladin are immune to fear and fear effects (woo) and everyone within your radius gets a +4 against fear effects. SO when fear hits, it usually hits hard…that said it doesn’t really come up OFTEN enough for me to want to rate this higher. Same sorta issue with the bravery ability. It does get rated slightly higher for giving you full immunity off the bat though.
   * [Antipaladin] Aura of Cowardice: OOOOOOOUCHIE MAMA. Anyone within 10 feet of you takes a wooping -4 to saves against ALL fear effects and if they are within your aura, they LOSE THEIR IMMUNITY TO FEAR. YIKE!!!!! This is a one of a kind ability that comes once in a blue moon. I can count on my hand how many abilities actually REMOVE immunities, and fewer still that give no bonuses to offset that. This in fact, gives them a PENALTY for even TRYING to be brave around you. Fear builds LOVE antipaladin…and honestly so do I. 
   * Divine Health/Plaguebringer (Ex): Disease Immunity!!! Dieases don’t come up very often, but when they do, having an answer to them is helpful. 
   * (2/5) [Paladin] Divine Health: So uh…thats it…you are immune to dieases……woo…yeah okay so this ability gets a much lower rating because again, dieases do not come up very often if at all, and when they do, they aren’t the most deadly. Still, when you need it, you’ll love it.
   * (4/5) [Antipaladin] Plaguebringer: This is how you make diseases deadly. You are immune to the negative affects of diseases but can still contract and spread them! Which means that congrats, you have yet ANOTHER debuff ability you can smack people with just to be awful. This pairs AMAZINGLY with the advanced ability of Urgathoa's Fighting Technique, which lets you basically tag someone with ALL contagious dieases you are currently carrying. BE THE SUPER SPREADER!!!!
   * (4/5) Mercies/Cruelties (Su)*: So both mercies and cruelties are great. They are basically rider effects that proc off of your Lay on Hands or Touch of Corruption abilities. Both of these abilities are solid but get substantially better once you give them a little support.
   * [Paladin] Mercy: When you affect a creature with lay on hands, you can apply ALL mercies that you currently know to that creature, suppressing various conditions for an hour. There is no save, or anything, it just works. Works even better when you have Word of Healing, so that now, you can do it from a range, and save the wizard without provoking or having to move.
   * [Antipaladin] Cruelties: When you affect a creature with touch of corruption, you can apply a single cruelty that you know. The creature makes a fort save (DC=10+½ Level+Cha) to negate, and if they fail, can get hit by some WICKED debuffs that last a fairly long time. Devastating on their own, but gets significantly better with a conductive weapon.
   * (4/5) Channel Energy (Su): Alright so you get channel energy equal to a cleric of your level (which is conspicuously equal to your lay on hands dice) in exchange for two uses of lay on hands, of which you do not have many. Now, channel energy on its own isn't the MOST amazing ability. It either does aight healing or damage in a radius, does not differentiate between friend or foe, and again, we have few uses. So why do I rate it so highly?

In short: options. Having the channel energy class feature opens a wealth of options, especially since you have the same level and potency as a cleric, and are far less MAD because you are a charisma based class, which gives you better DC’s and bonuses. Variant Channeling, Blessed Equipment, Channel Foci, Channel Smite, and so so much more all come from these uses, which makes your lay on hands EVEN MORE VALUABLE. 
      * DO NOT FORGET ABOUT VARIANT CHANNELING!!!! It is a super useful subsystem and definitely super cool and worth it if you don’t need extra healing or damage.
      * (4/5) Spells [1-4, Prepared, Divine]: Okay so let's talk real. We get spell casting from levels 1-4. No cantrips. We start with a -3 penalty to our caster level, and on the level well get spells??? We don’t actually even get a use of our first level spells. So again WHY AM I, ILUZRY, SPELL MAGE LOVER, rating this so highly? Surely this has to be garbage! SURELY the paladins baby spell list is trash, right? Well actually…it’s pretty fucking useful.
      * Flexible Features: So to start off with, the anti/paladin doesn’t NEED its spells to function. Even without them, it is a damage dealing, super healing/debuffing monster. Spells are just cherries on top. Most importantly, they are VERSATILE options. A paladin can prepare ANY spell on the paladin spell lists so long as they have slots, meaning that each spell basically functions as a minor class feature that you can swap in and out on the fly.
      * Action Economy: The paladin spell list boasts a hilarious amount of secret gems and unique spells that have casts times of a swift or immediate action, such as any of the litanys or guardian armor. In this way, if curated correctly, you should be able to run in, bash face, and still have enough juice throw some spice on it. This is unique for the class, as it makes up for the fact that they don’t have a formal gishfight ability, like fervor or spell combat.
      * Mainly Buffs and Healing: “But Iluzry” you ask, “What about your saves? Your dps! Spell Resistance? What about FIREBALL???” Well…the paladin does really have to worry about most of those things because their best spells are often support abilities for themselves or their teammates, meaning that they aren’t really going to have people roll saves.
      * Early Access: The paladin gets access to some REALLY useful spells a bit earlier than others. Lesser Restoration! Greater Angelic Aspect!!! Sure they get some spells later, but again, they dont NEED or expect to cast a lot of spells, and you can just pick the best ones…so do that!!!!!
      * Unique Spell Design: There are very few classes that can boast a spell list that was so perfectly and uniquely designed for them, so much so that it has a lot of spells that are amazing just for the paladin. The only class I think that comes close is the bard, but the difference can really be felt in spells like Widen Aura, which doubles the size of your aura abilities, of which you get a lot, and are amazing, or Holy Sword, a paladin only spell that gives you basically a holy avenger, or again, ANY of the litanies that are all their own form of amazing.
      * Caster Level and Spell Slot Mitigation: So we have two problems that we need to solve…which actually aren’t that hard to solve in general!
      * Caster Level: We can fix using the Magical Knack trait, which will turn our -3 into a -1 caster level. To get that last +1 on the cheap, consider looking into alchemical reagents, like Cold iron or Myrrh.
      * Spell Slots: So fun note, you get extra spell slots from having a high charisma modifier. Usually these are just sorta nice icing on the cake…bUTTT in our case we need as many as we can get. So don’t be afraid to boost your charisma into the stratosphere for more magical wonder. We can also take advantage of pearls of power (which we can use on the cheap) to make sure we keep our spell power going.
      * Divine Bond/Fiendish Boon (Su): So at fifth level we basically form a pact with some sort of celestial or fiendish spirit. For some odd reason, the devs decided that paladin deserved to have all of the options. That said, it’s not like anti-paladin got nothing.
      * (4/5) Weapon Bond: Okay this is going to be a lot. As a standard action you can basically enchant your weapon to be filled with the power of divine sickness for 1 minute per paladin level. You can give your weapon a +1 at level 5, with the bonus going up by 1 every 3 levels. This stacks with your weapons current enhancements. You can exchange any amount of bonus for an equivalent special weapon abilities listed below, so long as  your weapon remains at least at +1. If you break it, you don’t get another one for 30 days. You don’t get very many uses of it, but when you need excalibur, here it is…until you get Holy Sword and then ya know, use that probably.
      * [Paladin] Special Abilities: axiomatic, brilliant energy, defending, disruption, flaming, flaming burst, holy, keen, merciful, and speed
      * [Antipaladin] Special Abilities: anarchic, flaming, flaming burst, keen, speed, unholy, vicious, vorpal, and wounding
      * (5/5) [Paladin] Celestial Steed: Hey, you get an animal companion! We love animal companions!!! Don’t let anyone tell you they are too big to bring into dungeons, we have plenty of ways around that. Make sure you look into animal companion archetypes and feats to help make this an even better option. Oh and if that wasn’t enough, it starts out extra smart (so you dont have to teach it tricks) and later gets the celestial template AND SR. Nice! Shame that if it dies, you don't really get another one for a month though…so uh…make sure they don’t.
      * (3/5)* [Paladin] Agathion Bond {Variant Bond}: Better healing! Add your charisma modifier to any healing done from spells, lay on hands, or channel abilities. Normally this is pretty meh but can go up to OUTSTANDING if you take unsanctioned knowledge for path of glory and greater for some SERIOUS recovery as you get effectively fast healing 6 at level 7, which only increases from there!!! Again, limited uses per day, minutes per level, extra juice.
      * (4/5) [Paladin Variant Bond] Angelic Bond {Variant Bond}: Because we needed MORE auras. Once again, very few uses per day, for paladin level minutes, you summon the spirit of an angel in the form of a halo. This is really bright, as a continual flame. Also all homies with 20 feet get protection from evil (which lets us get some nice domination immunities) except the resistance and ac bonus both start at 3 and rise every three levels. Which ain’t bad! Be warned that a resistance bonus is the  same as a CLOAK of resistance so if everyone is good on items, or you are doing ABP, this might be less useful.
      * (2/5) [Paladin] Archon Bond {Variant Bond}: So okay as a standard action, again, a few times per day, you active your paladin ability. Anyone within 10 feet of you makes a will save against your gaze attack or…takes a -2 to saves, ac and attack rolls for 24 hours. Now that duration looks nice…BUTTTT  you likely wont be fighting anything for that long. I’d take a -4 for 1 minute over a -2 for the whole day any time. Moreover, the bond doesn’t really increase the penalties, just the range, and people can only be affected ONCE per 24 hours, save or no save…which means that it kinda gets worse.
      * (5/5) [Antipaladin] Fiendish Servant (Sp): So you basically get a single summoned monster but permanent that evolves with level….NICE!!!! Remember that some gods actually give you additional summoning options! This counts as SLA equal to ⅓ the paladin's level, which is really sick because that means you can use quicken SLA on it and a bunch of other mess. Moreover, since you can cast summon monster as an SLA, you can get summoned monster feats and have a super beefy homie with a duration of PERMANENT. HECK. YES.
      * Fiendish Outsider Servant Guide
      * Aura of Resolve/Despair (Su): Alrighty another 10 foot constant aura affect!! Let's do it!
      * (2/5) [Paladin] Aura of Resolve: Alright immunity to charms and everyone else gets a +4. So it’s useful but again, charms aren't super common I don’t think. But like I guess if fey are REALLLY a problem.
      * (5/5) [Antipaladin] Aura of Despair: HAHAHA alright if you are within 10 feet of someone? They take a -2 to all saves. Combine that with shaken from a good intimidate, and sickened from a cruel weapon? Congrats on -6 against anything lmao. 
      * Aura of Justice/Vengeance: Woo this is a doozy. Basically, expend two uses of your smite ability to give everyone within 10 feet of you the opportunity to smite. They have to do it before the end of your next turn and it only lasts a minute…but that's still most of the fight and they use your bonuses. Stack up with the homies and just have everyone dab on the enemy
      * (5/5) [Paladin] Aura of Justice: This is amazing because Smite Evil is good. This swaps with Aura of Vengeance if in an Evil campaign
      * (1/5) [Antipaladin] Aura of Vengeance: This is awful because Smite Good is bad. This swaps with aura of Justice if in an Evil Campaign or ya know you are fighting the party (GM’s looking at you.)
      * (4/5) Aura of Faith/Aura of Sin: Your weapons are now aligned and can bypass that pesky DR! This is useful so long as everyone doesn’t have +5 weapons…but if you have holy sword ya know, that helps too.
      * (3/5) Aura of Righteousness/Depravity: Meh DR and either immunity to compulsion or a -4 against compulsion.
      * Capstone: WOOP WOOP level 20 let's gooooooooooooooooooooo.
      * (2/5) [Paladin] Holy Champion: Alright you have DR10/evil, max healing on channel and lay on hands, and your smites now also have a banishment rider. All that sounds good right? Well DR10/evil is bypassed by +5 weapons…which most people have, and most of what you fight is well…evil. Also if you actually hit an evil outsider, your smite ends after 1 attack…because the “banishment” resolves. So basically we can’t smite evil outsiders anymore….which uh…we like doing. Oh well…at least the healing is good.
      * (3/5) [Paladin] Crusader Champion: All of your sorta meh auras now expand to 30 feet. Really, this is mainly good for Aura of Justice, but otherwise is kinda whatever.
      * (3/5) [Antipaladin] Unholy Champion:  DR10/good, Max damage on Channel and Touch of Corruption, with banishment on smite. Same issues, but smite good was already trash, and we actually don’t fight that much good so uh…yeah this one is a little better.
      * (5/5) [Antipaladin] Tip of The Spear: You get more smites and now can SMITE ANYTHING which is fantastic, we can finally fucking use our class feature!!!
      * (2/5) Soul Channel (Su): You get 6 more channel energy per day and the die goes up by one. Noooot as good as just getting your normal dice constantly maxed so uh…worse than un/holy champion.
      * (5/5) With This Sword (Ex): You gain a Noble Phantasm minor artifact!!! This is not only powerful, but also really really cool. Love that. Even cooler because you probably have a super holy avenger/unholy avenger by now.
      * (4/5) Won’t Stay Dead (Ex): Once per week, when you should lose, you don’t. 
      * (5/5) Perfect Body, Flawless Mind (Ex): Get 8 points that can be added to any ability score in any way. 5 to one, 3 to another. This is always helpful and people love free stats.
      * (5/5) The Boss (Ex): Get super leadership! Luckily everything else is so busted at this level, so this is fine.
