# 8th Level Spells

8th Level Spells
	Control
	* Reverse Gravity: No save, no SR battlefield control. Flyers still laugh at you though and there’s a lot of those at this level. It’s probably also effective property damage if you want that - few buildings are designed to handle gravity being reversed on them.
* Wall of Lava: It’s a very shapeable wall (you can choose individual 5’ squares, which not all walls allow - you can even make it two or more squares thick to force enemies trying to force their way through plow through even more wall) which is hard to get through without teleportation, or else high fire resistance/fire immunity and a burrow speed. The erupt feature probably isn’t worth doing though. It’s not clear which 5’ squares are eliminated when the wall’s size is reduced by damage or by eruption and you probably do want to check with your GM before casting whether it’s random, your choice, GM’s choice or what.
* Vinetrap: It’s like a super-Entangle.  In fact, it doesn’t require any plants in the area, so you might use it in a massive cavern to create plants you can cast Thorny/Burning Entanglement on which also fill up 90 feet into the air to slow fliers.  (Entangle affects plants in a radius without a distinction that they be on the ground, so Entangle is now difficult terrain for fliers.) Most peer threats at this level can just teleport past your tar pit nonsense, it has a save, and allows SR, so this is really more a high-level godcaster spell aimed at single-handedly turning the tide of a war mostly fought by low-level nobodies than taking out end-game threats.  Swift vines are probably the better option if you’re casting Thorny Entanglement unless you need to beat DR - noxious vines’ DC 15 save is a joke.
* Earthquake: An 80’ radius spread is quite a lot of destruction. If you want to break an army this is a solid spell for the job. Even against more normal targets it’s pretty good underground or next to a cliff as being pinned under rubble can take enemies out for the duration of the combat.  Those are some pathetic save DCs where they save for half damage, but this is not a damage spell - creatures under a cliff or underground are buried alive regardless of the save!  That’s right, this is no-save, SR: no, BAYBEEE!  Being buried takes a DC 25 strength check to escape from by yourself, and nat20s don’t auto-succeed on ability checks, so casting this in caves is basically a no-save-just-die against anything with less than 20 strength, and even if they have more, this is basically a Mass Maze spell where a few will pop back out one at a time for the martials to chop up. You can’t use this everywhere, but in the right terrain, this is hands-down one of the best control spells a druid could dream of.
	Buff
	* Fey Form IV: You don’t get new sizes (and therefore different ability score bonuses or new forms), and this costs 2 spell levels higher than Fey Form III, so the new abilities you gain really better be worth it.  Nereids if you want to be so pretty that people have to save or stare at you (plus a bunch of other defensive abilities), or shadow collectors for claws which do 1d6 points of charisma damage are highlights here. Whisperers, mentioned under Fey Form III are also good as they gain more defensive abilities than the earlier spell gave.
* Form of the Exotic Dragon II: Fey Form IV is better in all ways if you have armor. The only reason to cast this is for the image.
* Frightful Aspect: If you don’t like being full-attacked in melee and your current enemies aren’t immune to fear then this is the spell for you. Making your enemies frightened as soon as they hit you will prevent them from continuing a full attack. Frightful Aspect also comes with a slew of other bonuses including spell resistance.
* Heart of the Mammoth: The +8 enhancement bonus to Str and Con doesn’t stack with items which you will certainly have at this level, but still gives some bonus. The immunity to fear and +4 morale bonus to other Will saves is probably new. Also this is a touch spell you can cast on any of your allies, and isn’t a polymorph so it stacks with other buffs including wild shape.  The round/level duration really kills what could otherwise be a good immunity buff.
* Animal Shapes: Beast Shape III on up to CL allies covers your party and then some. You have other ways of giving out flight, but this may be useful for mass swimming or burrowing. I can’t imagine that you have enough people wanting to fight in animal shape to get full use out of that however.  You can use this on your animal companion to finally be able to polymorph your animal into a different kind of animal, but since it’s not personal, you might also apply it on Awakened animals, the paladin’s mount, or just any general big, tough animals you got on your side with wild empathy.
	Debuff
	* Death Clutch: Save or die and they’ll need resurrection, or regenerate + raise dead to recover. Pretty nasty, and even if they don’t die they’re staggered for a round. Best used when there’s someone handy who can figure out whether the prospective clutchee has 201+ hp or not, but even on a target who can’t be killed instantly 1d4 Con damage and 1d4 Con bleed is going to be effective. This is one of the better spells to accompany with evil laughter.  Speaking of which, it’s [evil], so if you worship a good deity, they won’t let you do it.  Killjoy.  This is for style, anyway, as you really don’t want single-target SR:yes that only staggers for one round on a fort save nearly anything that is a real threat will be able to reliably make at this level.
* Euphoric Tranquility: A 1 round/level duration even at this level isn’t enough to do anything much out of combat. Euphoric tranquility is a combat debuff, forcing the enemies to do nothing if they’re not attacked, and to make a save each round that they are attacked to do anything much. Genuinely crippling - the big selling point here is the fact that the initial effect has NO SAVE, the target only gets to save if attacked, so it’s like Maze for non-wizards, a no-save time-out corner for enemies while you murder their friends.  (Smart enemies will attack the monster themselves, however…) If the enemies are dumb, they fail will saves anyway, or you just prevent them from hitting their friend, this is better than Maze because you can preposition your guys and delay actions so you can all full attack while flanking just after the target’s turn and play “will it blend?” with the target before a will save to break the spell will matter.  It still has SR, but druids really need all the no-save spells they can get at higher levels, where saves balloon out of control.
	Blast
	* Stormbolts: A soft 30’ range limit (although you need an expensive widen spell rod to increase the range) means you can’t use Stormbolts in every situation, and a Fort save makes it easier for many to make the save, but being able to not harm allies and the round of stun on a failed save keeps it a solid blast. If you are in a flying form, consider flying into the middle of enemy ranks before casting this spell. At this level, however, you may get more out of stacking metamagic on lower-level blasts, like a maximized Burst of Rot.
* Sunburst (debuff) Druids are supposed to really dislike undead so it’s nice to see a good anti-undead spell on their list. Obliterates an entire cabal of vampires in one shot, but you could do that with Morning Sun last spell level?  I guess this doesn’t have a material component, but is 500 gp worth worrying about for an instant win?  Against others, 80’ radius save or blind (permanently), possibly from 1000’ away, is not the worst debuff.  Just be aware that against non-undead targets, the damage is pathetic for the level so you’re just blinding them, a save negates, and it has SR, so expect to only really snag a quarter of the targets at best.
	Heal
	* Cure Serious Wounds Mass: No, this is not a valid use of your standard action at this level. Let alone an 8th level spell slot.  Put reach spell or maybe intensify spell on Heal if you want a healing spell in an SL 8 slot.  Or better yet, finally realize druid is not an HP healer class.
	Summons
	* Summon Giant Ally III: You’re still basically trading down to a weaker creature in exchange for a summon that can fight on this round rather than next round.  This is still generally worth it mid-battle, as action economy is everything, and what’s the point in summoning a creature next round when combat could be ended this round?  Summoning several lower-level giants is still a better option than one higher-level giant.  That said, at this level, expect enemies with 30+ AC, so if you don’t have a high-level bard whose inspire courage that can buff them passively, a +14/+9 iterative attack (although a rod of giant summons to make a giant giant still helps) ain’t gonna cut the mustard, so getting 1d3(+1 with superior summons) of the SNA VII-tier giants are potentially better.  Fire giants with a +21/+16/+11 4d6+15 damage attacks will definitely put out the most damage if there is no fire resistance to worry about.  While desert giants’ scimitar TWF is interesting, each hit does less than half what a fire giant’s swing does. Ash giant is weaker than a fire giant and cloud giant is roughly equivalent, so 2-4 fire giants will stomp one cloud giant every time.
* SNA VIII: There aren’t any bigger cats to escalate to but summoning 1d4+1 dire tigers is a valid move. Elder earth elementals get a +26 compared to greater earth elemental’s +21 slams and about 30 more hit points, but otherwise, elder earth elementals are mostly just +2 more for most of their stats, making this the SNA spell that you should definitely consider summoning multiples of lower-tier summons rather than any of these unless you think you can make some of these maneuvers they have, but with a lot of high-level enemies having 50+ CMD, even the elder elementals are likely going to only hit with maneuvers on nat 20s, so going for numbers, bulk, and survivability may be better strategies.  That said, if you love maneuvers and have a greater rod of giant summoning, purple worms are gargantuan (colossal with the rod), have a burrow speed, and can swallow whole.  With giant summons and augmented summons, that’s a respectable +44 CMB on the grapple check, and ain’t no method of shutting down an end-game caster quite like dropping a hungry sand worm on him!  Tell the worm to burrow, and even if they get out, they’re ejected underground and are buried alive.
	Utility
	* Entomb: The druid’s answer to create demiplane, this makes you a safe and pleasant hidey-hole.  I feel like a druid could do this as a compromise to preserving nature while having a city form nearby.  Put the nature in an always-sunny preserve belowground, and then have a city above.  Can you bury the same tract of land twice to drop it even lower underground, then cast Entomb back up on the surface again, creating stacked layers?  Put a farm in the middle layer for food for the surface city, and the nature preserve in the lower layer.  Better yet, go dwarfy, and make the city be a complex multi-layer affair with sunshiney subway streets and houses in the bedrock while having wilderness above.  Can you perform multiple Entombs side-by-side to create an ever-widening whole forest in a vault?  Likely no combat value, but these are the kind of cool spells I love seeing at top-end spellcasting that you can plan around, but never actually seem to get to do in real games…  In spite of how it says things are displaced safely, if you actually stack layers of city, farm, and nature over one another, this would become a nightmare if it were ever dispelled.  This is the kind of spell you’d make into a staff so you can spam it constantly.  A 10-charge cast staff with no other tricks costs 14,600 gp, and with an arcane battery, you can add a new set of squares to the underground every 5 days without additional cost besides your time.
* Word of Recall: Escape the current encounter back to your home/other safe place.  You get it 2 SL/4 character levels after the clerics, to say nothing of a wizard’s Teleport. Or for that matter a druid’s Transport Via Plants; if you’re willing to lug around enough ivy you can do this at spell level 6 just like a cleric, and ignore the higher level version.  The one neat thing is it brings you back to wherever you memorized the spell with unlimited range besides no planar travel, so if you memorize this in a desert, it does create a “warp point” for you so long as you never empty that slot, although that’s so limited in use that it’s almost certainly not worth it being SL 8.
* Wandering Weather: Control Weather that you can drag along with you, or more importantly with your ship/airship; it doesn’t take long to leave the area of a Control Weather spell on a fast ship.  You probably have a better way (like Tailwind) of keeping your ship sailing than this by SL 8, but you could blow a whole navy forwards with this one, or try to use it selectively creating tornadoes where the enemy ships are located during a naval battle.  If you wanted to be a true avenger of nature, you can walk or fly all around a city with multiple tornadoes touching down everywhere to flatten the whole city with one cast, rather than having to do it in chunks.  (Just have a method to keep yourself safe from your own doom weather.)
* Fey Gate: Unlike the Gate spell this doesn’t have a summoning function. It exists to have a gate that can take significant numbers of people through rather than just the handful that can plane shift together, and to give druids a means of planar travel at all.  Taking large numbers of people to the First World seems like a way to just fill up an eldest’s mansion with more slaves, though.  Or to allow a fey army through to the Prime Material.  Villains like doing that, but most PCs should think twice before leading an army of lower-level scrubs into an inherently dangerous place. If you have any other caster, you’re better off having them Plane Shift you, or just UMDing scrolls of Plane Shift rather than waiting on this spell, as it’s even more random than Plane Shift, so I’m not sure why you’d bother with the SL 8 slot even if you definitely do want to go to the First World for some reason.  If you just want to meet fey, there are plenty in the Prime Material and you can Entice Fey.
	Protection
	* Seamantle: If you want to put out a forest fire this helps to a degree. Otherwise, improved cover is good but probably not 8th level spell good. You are always counted as swimming, gain a swim speed and breathe water, so like with other immunities, you can use this to proactively drop gas or fire spells on top of yourself to use the immunity offensively.  You can probably move in and out of water freely, and if you are using Air Walk, (might?) be able to use this as some sort of omni-terrain movement where you can swim, surface, then start swim-flying in the same round?  Talk to your GM about it if you’re in a naval campaign.  It is conjuration, not a polymorph, so you can stack it with a polymorph/wildshape if you wanted to wild shape into a giant squid, start grappling people and be a land kraken.  It’s also “target: you” so you could put it on your animal companion if you wanted them to be a land kraken. It’s not the best buff on its own, but if it stacks and you know you’re only having one fight today so you’re not worried about spending an SL8 on a tertiary buff, a min/level defense buff with an immunity is going to be a good move in some scenarios...
	Beastmaster
	* Atavism, Mass: It’s a buff you can use on the uncountable number of dire tigers, dire crocodiles, or dire tyrannosaurs you can potentially put on the battlefield, but it’s still an iffy buff to put on your animal companion.  Because it’s min/level, you might want to put it on creatures you created with Alter Summoned Monster, but there are no SNA VIII or IX animals, sadly, and a purple worm or storm giant will still be better options than an atavism dire crocodile unless you needed the aquatic ability.  Casting it mid-battle after a summon is not likely worth the action, so you’d have to cast this on rounds/level summons before bursting into the room and starting the fight, which is… iffy for gargantuan animals to actually be able to fit through a door before the battle is already over.
	________________
