# 2nd Level Spells

2nd Level Spells
	Control
	* Cloud of Seasickness: Like fog cloud but it includes a debuff. Well, the duration and range are much shorter too.  The sicken effect is [poison], so if you use both Delay Poison and Ashen Path on your martials, you can drop the cloud on top of the front line and your side’s immune.  Too bad sicken’s nowhere near as good as nauseated, but as a combat spell durations above rounds don’t matter, so only the very limited range make this in any way worse mid-combat than Fog Cloud.
* Euphoric cloud: Like fog cloud, but includes a distraction; if you make sure enemies are deep enough in the cloud they can’t see out, not much will break the fascinated condition. Short duration so you likely can’t cast in advance of combat.
* Fog Cloud✰: Shut down line of sight anywhere on the map. Ashen path combos with it very well.  Use spells like Entangle to ensure they can’t get out of the effect and become able to see again.
* Ice Slick: Grease a level higher and it does some damage now… but Grease isn’t on your spell list, so this might have to do. At least you can use Winter Grasp to boost its save.  Note it only does its damage once, so it’s not useful for dazing.
* Sickening Entangle: Entangle, but failing a save now means they take -2 on their rolls to save against your other spells.  If they have ranged attacks, they’re less likely to hit with them, too.  Delay Poison makes your allies immune to the sickened, (and arguably, the whole spell is [poison], so if they’re immune to [poison]...)
* Soften Earth and Stone: You need the right kind of floor (soft dirt)  to cast this on, but what better way to bog down walkers than an actual instant bog, just add spell?  A kind of “mass Grease” that creates a 10-foot-square of ref save or suck per level.
* Stone Call (blast): It does damage too, but this is mainly no-save, no-SR massive area difficult terrain to bog enemies down and buy time for more spells.  Barbarians will hate your total area charge denial.  Entangle is better, but you can use this even where there are no plants if you can’t spare the action to throw some seeds or a potted plant. Also (Mass) Feather Step lets your allies totally ignore the effect, which your barbarian may greatly appreciate, alongside Ashen Path and Fog Cloud to disable enemies without slowing your own martials down any.
* Winter Grasp✰ (blast/debuff): This can be anywhere between OK and amazing, depending on your level of coordination.  This is a low-level no-save SR:no AoE saving throw debuff that also improves the often sadly low acrobatics checks creatures need to make to not trip in spells like Grease, Ice Slick, or Sleet Storm.  It’s also treated as ice, which doubles movement cost which is not the same as difficult terrain, so it stacks.  Ask your GM whether using a lesser elemental metamagic rod changes what element to which the saving throw debuff applies (turning it into “Autumn’s Rot” that is a -2 on saves versus [acid] spells if you make it acid, for example.)  Otherwise, use a lesser elemental metamagic rod (cold) to turn Burning Entanglement into Freezing Entanglement, and now it costs four times the movement to go a single tile, they are taking up to 5d6 cold damage per round, and have a -2 on saves versus the entangle.  Coordinate with other control casters in your party so your Winter Grasp makes their Grease or Sleet Storm or dazing metamagic spells more likely to work.  I’ve seen druids and (winter) witches built around this one spell.
	Buff
	* ✰Ashen Path✰: Use this with Fog Cloud or Obscuring Mist to make your enemies functionally blind while your whole party can see them perfectly.  Unlike Invisibility, Fog Cloud doesn’t disappear when you attack! Use Delay Poison and Stinking Cloud to make a zone of blindness and nausea while your side is immune, negating most ability for the enemy to resist.
* Invigorating Poison: Invert a poison into an alchemical +4 buff.  Essentially only alchemists normally get those, so this has use to the end of the game if you can set it up.  Wildshape into animals with poison (or use Vermin Shape) and milk your own poison (or just bite yourself after casting this), or raise some pet centipedes and sea urchins to gain +4 bonuses to all sorts of things.  Look up the Ultimate Wilderness rules for manufacturing your own poisons.  The short duration (usually only 1-3 minutes of actual poison duration) is the big downside, but if you’re the one setting up meticulous ambushes instead of being attacked, this hypothetically stacks with all the belts and headbands for a +2 to everything for the whole party.  With Full Pouch, it gets easy to supply poisons for this spell.
* Owl’s Wisdom: Pretty much only useful for making your headband easier to make, this doesn’t last long enough to be worth the slot. Use it if you are low on equipment OR funds.
* Harmless Form: This is a very long-duration polymorph if you can make use of it.  You can turn your midget allosaurus into a horse you can ride, or turn your wolf into a hawk to let it fly.  
* Pouncing Fury: As a personal spell, you can cast this on your companion, too.  If you have rake or an unusual number of claws, this can be useful, but those types of shapes often already have pounce.  The rounds/level duration mean you’re likely delaying entering combat unless you’re just casting it on the companion and letting them fight for you.
	Debuff
	* Aboleth Lung (Utility): Touch save or die; a shame it’s so slow.  In a more tactical sense someone holding their breath is going to have a hard time casting spells. Also it’s water breathing a spell level lower, with an annoying limitation. Note the lack of (D)ismissability unless you take fleeting spell metamagic on it.
* Burdened Thoughts: Flying enemies are a HUGE nuisance to a control druid, flying over all your Entangles and other area-denial spells.  This spell gives a save and SR, but if they fail, they’re grounded.  As it is technically mental, this may arguably be one of the few speed reduction spells to actually impact a creature with Freedom of Movement, as well.  This might be your only defense against proteans at low levels besides Pale Flame.
* Burst of Radiance: No save minor damage and save-or-blind, over an area with a decent range. Also an aggressive form of detect evil.
* Pox Pustules: This is a -4 Dex penalty and gives the enemy a choice between sickened or staggered.  Remember that they will choose the one more beneficial for them, so martials will just take -2 on their rolls, while staggering casters doesn’t impair them much.  It can be as much as a -4 on some rolls, but this doesn’t actually cripple anyone, and it’s too obviously hostile for using outside battle.  It’s annoying, but this isn’t the best use of your actions, especially as it’s single-target, fort save negates, and SR: yes. 
* Sickening Strikes: if you have enough attacks the chance of a target failing their save against this approaches unity. Wild shape can give you many attacks. Rounds/level duration makes it questionable whether sicken’s mere -2 is worth spending an action during combat to cast this spell, however.  Note that the sickening spell metamagic applies do SL 1 spells (like Frostbite) can accomplish something similar, and that can be cast before battle, although it may not apply to all natural attacks.
	Blast
	* Aggressive Thundercloud: It’s Flaming Sphere, but for electric damage coverage.
* Flame Blade: There are whole builds based on this spell.  You don’t get strength damage, but this makes your melee attacks target touch AC while also having the functionality of a scimitar.  Feats that benefit scimitars benefit this spell, including dervish dance, which arguably allows dex-to-damage (GMs may ban this), and thus the only major downside.  As a spell, you can theoretically even use this while polymorphed, although it has to be a shape you can convince the GM is able to wield a weapon.
* Flaming Sphere: Mainly a way to use your move action productively while casting better spells.  The thing is, unlike wizards, druids often use their move action, so this is not the benefit it is for wizards.  Want to summon?  That takes full-round casting.  Want to push your companion or handle any non-companion animals?  That’s a move action.  Want to wade into combat?  You definitely want your move actions there.  The slow 20’ speed means enemies can out-walk your sparky ball, but if you Entangle them and keep them from shooting back with Fog Cloud, the enemies might have to just sit there and take it.  Also a hypothetical chassis for dazing spell, as an SL 2 ref save spell, but you can only target a single creature.
* Gozreh's Trident: Essentially, Gozreah’s bootleg Flame Blade with the serial numbers filed off, but with less exploits and lightning flavored.  There is no RAW support for what happens if you throw one of these, in spite of the fact that it’s a throwable weapon.
* Pale Flame: Although it has limited “ammunition”, this is a no-save option that can take advantage of full attacks as a ranged touch fire spell, meaning Haste adds more attacks per round.  It can be a “backup ranged weapon” if your dex is poor or you don’t have anything but a sling.  Alternately, it can be used as a melee touch attack, which means it works like Flame Blade but without feats that specifically make this fire a better weapon, yet having better base damage and still allowing natural attacks to be secondary attacks.  It’s also arguably usable in more wildshape forms.  This can also start fires for traps or Pyrotechnics with a collaborating wizard.  A lesser extend rod doubles your “ammo”.
* Whip of Spiders (Summon): For those who wanted Flame Blade, but grosser, shorter duration, and based on a whip.  There are a lot of whip-related feats you can take, but that can be a detriment to a class that does not gain bonus feats. Theoretically, you can build around whips and make this good, though.
	Heal
	* Delay Poison: This stops poisons you can’t cure easily from killing allies, and you might want to have a scroll (written by a hunter so it’s only SL 1, and even upleveling it costs less) of this spell for that purpose, but the big benefit is that you make your allies (temporarily) not feel the effects of your own [poison] spells, like Stinking Cloud.  If the party doesn’t mind sudden nausea when this eventually wears off, it’s practically a gas mask for your fighter to go into the Stinking Cloud.  Being invulnerable to your own spells makes indiscriminate AoE control magic much more fun.  You can also use this if you are anticipating poisonous monsters as a prophylactic and prevent poisons from ever mattering.  Be sure to use heal checks to give your allies bonuses against them, or just cast Invigorating Poison to turn it into a buff.
* Healing Token: You can spend a spell to spend an action and a spell to make a heal check from range. It makes you casting a cure spell an immediate action, but the other character has to spend a standard action activating it.  This is a grossly inefficient spell, but technically, there is no range limit once cast so you can hypothetically use it to track status or heal a creature you split ways with.
* Recentering Drone: Emergency condition suppression.  It takes concentration, so you’re out of the fight if you use this yourself.  It’s vastly preferable to make a scroll and hand it to the wizard’s familiar or a cohort or anybody else to UMD so they can use their actions on it while you focus on winning the fight.
* Restoration, Lesser: You will encounter a lot of ability score damage in Pathfinder.  This is one of the only readily-available spells that removes ability score penalties and damage on your list until Heal, which you’ll need to wait until level 13 to unlock.  Take potions, scrolls, or even wands of this spell, and you’ll thank me when you encounter shadows or other ability-score-damaging undead. You can also cure fatigued, which a barbarian might need at some point.  Look out for the three round casting time.  Potions are notable for being consumable as a standard action, herbalism druids. Also, be aware that druids do not get the other Restoration spells! You’ll have to UMD scrolls if nobody in the party can cast it for things like negative levels and ability drain.
* Soothing Word: This is an emergency scroll spell - pass them out to several party members who can UMD it.  You probably won’t like leaving your allies sickened or shaken, but it’s better than them being utterly useless while nauseated or frightened.  A more specific scroll of Remove Fear and Remove Sickness is better (and cheaper) if you’re able to remember all the “remove” scrolls, however.  Remove Paralysis can remove staggered but not stunned, however, so this spell may be the only useful “remove stun” spell.  Recentering Drone can do this, but only to suppress the effect, and if you reduce nauseated to sickened, Recentering Drone suppresses the whole effect, but leave that sort of thing for familiars to concentrate upon while you do serious casting.
	Summons
	* Alter Summoned Monster: Used as intended, this is a moderately useful spell for switching tactics mid-battle at the cost of a standard action and a spell, but this spell works on any summoning spell, even ones that last for hours/level… like Aquatic Cavalry.  Turn them into small earth elementals that can earth glide and spy out the whole dungeon for you, or air elementals that can scour the skies and report back any monsters.  Heighten spell metamagic or higher-level summons like Eagle Aerie let you summon real threats for very long durations so you can pre-buff summons or use fey summon creatures for utility spellcasting. Also remember, this means that all of your summon nature’s ally spells? Can be exchanged for summon monster! Basically a straight upgrade.
* Aquatic Cavalry: Bizarrely, druid lacks Mount or Communal Mount, the typical wizard target for Alter Summoned Monster, but they get this spell which has a similar duration.  Technically, the change in duration from this spell’s description after the hippocampi attack shouldn’t matter as Alter Summoned Monster changes the spell it actually is, but ask your GM to make sure.  This spell doesn’t require water in any way, so just plot them out on land and tell them to suck it up as you start Altering the ones you want to use.
* Summon Swarm: Rats are tiny, and thus will be attacked, AoO’d, and likely killed (with 16 HP) before they can do damage.  Spiders and bats are diminutive and thus immune to normal weapons.  If you’re fighting something that can’t cast and is trapped in a pit or Entangle, you can gradually gnaw them to death with this.  Bats being fliers may keep them out of your death traps.  Concentration means it can last almost indefinitely, and you might just get on a horse and ride away while concentrating, but you need to get creative about ways to herd your ravenous bat swarm towards the enemy, and not you.  This is likely better as a scroll or spell used by someone else if you can Control Vermin.
* SNA II: The exciting thing at this level are small elementals, which are the first summons that can really tank hits without dying instantly or have very notable extraordinary abilities.  Earth elementals are the best tanks at this level, and can earth glide to scout through walls or ambush enemies.  Air elementals have stupidly high flight speed and can interrupt air movement with whirlwind. Water elementals work the same underwater. Note that “elementals” can include more than the four basic elements like lightning elementals, which have a bonus to attacking enemies in metal armor.  Mud elementals can earth glide, entrap, and bog down enemies.  Ice elementals ignore icy surfaces (like Winter Grasp) and stagger with their basic attacks. Magma elementals can also earth glide and create damaging difficult terrain.  Aether elemental’s telekinetic throw is a ranged attack if you need it, or can be used to throw medium and smaller enemies (fort negates) into your control spells.  All of these abilities are very weak now, but just get more powerful as you get through larger elementals.  For a non-elemental choice, squids are grappling powerhouses in the water, but otherwise, take an elemental.  You also can just summon 1d3 SLA I creatures, with eagles being the best attackers just for having 3 attacks and ponies being the only creatures that might possibly survive being hit even at this level. Mites are dubiously useful for controlling summoned vermin swarms (like spiders) using their racial empathy.
	Utility
	* Beastspeak: Communication is useful, and prevents you being ignored in wild shape. Having a seat at the table when plans are made avoids being assigned to something you consider a suicide charge, and tactically letting people know what you’ve noticed or thought is important. Not a substitute for natural spell - few druid spells lack a S component.  A ring of eloquence makes this spell redundant, although you might want your ring finger back for another ring.
* Elemental Speech: Feyspeakers may be faces but few other druids are. Still, it’s useful to be able to talk to NPCs (not just elementals, either; most creatures with a non-land move speed), and this spell also mostly substitutes for speak with animals.  If you don’t bother putting points into linguistics to learn all the elemental languages, this is a means of speaking terran with your hours/level earth elemental spies from Alter Summon Monster when they report back the lay of the land in the dungeon.
* Hanspur’s Flotsam Vessel: A surprisingly powerful and often overlooked overland travel spell.  If you use extend spell (as from a lesser extend rod) or just cast it multiple times, this is a spell that can let you travel up to 336 miles per day (28 12-mile hexes, which is often the whole campaign map’s length in a hex crawl) any time you can get near water through the power of 24 hour movement that ignores all penalties to travel speed. Since you ignore hazards, you can technically sail up rapids that would stop normal boats.  With spells assisting, this raft can be a better ship than some actual sailing ships.  See the daily spell discussion thread on it for more details.
* Full Pouch: Game-breaking utility.  If you’re using poisons with Invigorating Poison, you now make all your poisons cost 1 gp per dose after you manage to make/buy a single dose.  Your poisons and alchemical items also now use your spell save DC.  Print infinite money.  The options for abuse are nearly limitless, just see the daily spell discussion post on it.  This is even more stupid with an herbalist druid if your GM doesn’t recognize the danger and immediately banhammers it, as you can just duplicate high-level spells with an SL 2 spell. The only bad part of this spell is figuring out how to manage not to have it banned while reaping as many rewards as possible.
* Grasping Vine (Utility): Do a whole lot of stuff at 20’ range. Touch spells, triggering traps, possibly dirty trick combat maneuvers. It may be limited to vine leshies by their biology but you’re a druid, biology is something you control.  Note that all actions with the vine take a standard action, even if they wouldn’t normally, like merely opening doors or touching things.  This is awful action economy, so it’s more of an out-of-combat utility spell.
* Spider Climb:  A poor druid’s fly spell.  In the right situation (like inside a cave or other enclosed spaces), it can be nearly as good as flying, it is a spell level lower, and it lasts 10 times as long.
* Warp Wood: Very funny in naval campaigns, when you can break an enemy ship so they can’t sail away fast enough to escape.  This can also be a “lock” on a door if you want to camp in a dungeon and want to at least make the enemy spend enough time bashing the door down to give you time to prepare.  It also serves to “unlock” doors now that Knock requires a caster check.  Note that unattended items get no save, so you can use this from a scroll or wand if you need to “unlock” a lot of wooden doors without a rogue.  As an offensive spell against enemies, warp all the bows and crossbows so the enemies stuck in your Thorny Entangle can’t try to shoot you now that they can’t move, but they do get a save for attended weapons.  It’s a very versatile spell, and can work well with Wood Shape.
* Share Language: It’s like Tongues, but lower level, and 24 hours if you need to communicate with some alien creature that only speaks a racial language.  The target gets one of your languages, so it can now speak common and let you fade to the back as the face takes the lead.  It even works on any Alter Summon Monster you create that isn’t an elemental.  Remember that sharing druidic results in being exiled from the druiding association, so don’t share that one. It’s harmless and has a non-scaling duration, so you can scroll this one safely, although the arcane scroll (by a bard) will be cheaper if you can UMD or get the wizard to read it, instead.
	Protection
	* Barkskin: A classic druid buff, and part of why druids are such good buffers.  Note the “existing” means it stacks with other natural armor for your animal friends.  I routinely pack several of these, and it’s a good target for a pearl of power 2 so you can share it with all your friends.
* Ironskin: Barkskin with 1 or 2 more AC, but it has 1/10th the duration and it’s personal-range.  You can still cast this on your animal companion with share spells.  If hit with a crit, dismissing the spell negates it - I’d usually rather keep the AC, but if the spell’s nearing the end of its duration, you might as well.
* Resist Energy: A ubiquitous buff basically every full caster gains, so divvy up who has to cast it based on spell slot needs.  When you see enemies focused on a specific element, like an ice cave full of ice monsters with cold-based attacks, this is a way to negate a huge amount of damage, and it lasts a very long time.  Bring pearls of power 2 unless you think you can get by with Communal Resist Energy.  Fire or cold resistance can also negate environmental effects like fatigue from heat.
* Spindrift Spritz: It’s pretty limited in what it affects, and you need to actually memorize the spell to use it as an immediate action, unlike most condition-countering spells that can just go on a scroll, but you might need to prevent an ally from getting hit with Slow.
* With the Wind: Usually wind is only an issue when someone casts Control Winds or similar. This is a partial counter to a much higher level spell but doesn’t work if they use the really powerful windspeeds; you may want to quicken it or keep it as a potion or scroll.
* Wild Instinct: 8-hour duration makes this an “all day spell”, useful for overland travel.  “Perception checks in the surprise round” are essentially code for “who gets the surprise round” with most overland random encounters. 
	Beastmaster
	* Alpha Instinct: When Charm Animal’s single-target nature is too restricting, this is a mass version that only improves attitudes one step, but that may be enough to get the animals to listen.  Talk a herd of aurochs into stampeding for you. This also works as a lazy druid’s food option, or for if you have many mouths to feed.
* Carry Companion: When you can’t lug a 600 pound lion up a rope, carry companion is there for you. Also useful for bringing your tyrannosaurus to the King’s ball.
* Control Vermin: You don’t always see major vermin threats, but when you do, this is a potent spell to turn what would otherwise be an enemy into an ally you can potentially crash into another enemy.  Control animal checks are move actions, and ride checks can be free actions to just guide a giant scorpion you’re sitting on.  I’ve also used this spell to turn a drow priestess’s own spider swarm minions against her.  Combine it with Summon Swarm (cast by someone else) so you can actually control the swarm.
* Lockjaw: Grapple is a debilitating condition, especially against a caster.  If you’re mainly using your animal companion as the front line tar pit to delay the enemy from reaching you or the wizard, grapple kills movement dead.  You can also use it as a way to add another grab attack on a creature that is already able to grab, like adding grab to the tail of a crocodile so it can get two chances to grab and do a death roll. 
* Natural Rhythm: An escalating damage bonus like the hammer the gap feat, but it doesn’t end when the round does. At low levels, you or your animal companion may not hit often enough to really make use of it, but at higher levels, they may be able to make solid work of it. Natural attack barbarians will be very interested in this, as well. It makes a useful potion being a touch-range spell; druidic herbalism says hi.
* Sea Steed: Druid lacks Mount, but gets two different spells this level to make sea horsies and Hanspur’s Flotsam Vessel!  Rather than summoning, this one converts a normal horse into a “sea horse”... or “sea lion” as the case may be.  Technically, if you can sit on it, it’s a “mount”, right?  Use this when your 2-ton warhorse, or maybe 3-ton tiger animal companion is too heavy for your Flotsam Vessel, but you don’t want to just Carry Companion in case you get into a fight and you want to give Mr. Fluffy an amphibious option so your tiger can still charge-pounce those sharks.  It’s lower-level and longer-lasting than other polymorphs that might let you turn your animal companion into a squid, so this is a viable way to keep your animal companion with you in underwater adventures so long as your GM doesn’t call BS on your claims dimetrodons make great mounts.
	Information
	* Eagle Eye: It’s like Commune with Birds if for some reason you can’t get birds to talk to you (or your GM makes the birds only give worthless information).  The minute-long cast time even reduces any benefit from not having to wait 10 minutes for the birds to report in.  If you need to spot a ship when so far out at sea that no birds are nearby, this could be useful.  Note that nothing about the spell says the sensor moves once cast, so it can also be cast while sailing or otherwise continuously moving to see if anyone is trailing you.
* Detect Magic, Greater: The lower level version is a cantrip that you can cast just on the suspicion that it might be useful. Greater DM you need to plan about a little, but being able to recognise individual spellcaster’s signatures or find traces days old can be useful in intrigue settings where you need to CSI together how a magic-assisted heist took place.
* Insect Scouts (Situational): Not to be confused with Insect Spies, which is a general-purpose scouting spell, this spell is for detecting “structural flaws” and “alarms”... basically, this is a spell for intrigue or heist scenarios that lets you reroll botched rolls during a stealth section by retroactively having knowledge you didn’t actually role-play gaining.  I dislike spells that overwrite narrative with mechanics this hard, but it may be the difference between an easy job and being wanted dead or alive and not being able to show your face in the city again.  Since it’s personal, you need to get the rogue to UMD a scroll of this spell if you want them to make the disable device check.  At least you make the cheapest scrolls…
* Lay of the Land: A +3 to +5 bonus on a couple of skills is nice and being insight-typed it stacks with most other bonuses. Unfortunately it only applies to rolls to avoid becoming lost, which if you’re pumping survival, you should almost never be at risk of doing.  See if your GM will allow it to work on other tasks, like finding landmarks if you’re using exploration gameplay or charting a course at sea so it has some use.
* Seed Spies: It’s a type of “lesser Arcane Eye”.  The seeds are easily killed if anything spots them and finds flying seeds suspicious or notices a seed stuck in their fur, they’re very slow if they fly on their own power, and they can only hear, but this is a very low-level spell for autonomous scouting if you aren’t abusing Alter Summoned Monster.
	________________
