# 4th Level Spells

4th Level Spells
	Control
	* Blast of Wind: Knocking prone your enemies, fort save negates, is fun but maybe not worth a 4th level spell. Throwing them around a bit is more fun if you can set up a good trap. Either relies on the enemies being small enough for the desired effect which threshold varies by caster level. Per the Core Rulebook, p183, you get an AoO for movement out of threatened squares regardless of action, even forced movement, so this can be a way to trigger an AoO on critters that are small.
* Gravel Vortex (Blast): This is Stone Call with a smaller radius at twice the spell level for just a bit more damage, which was never the point of Stone Call.
* Ice Storm (Blast): This is essentially an inferior Stone Call that just does a little more damage.  It even gives SR for some reason.  Don’t get it confused with the much better Sleet Storm!
* Volcanic Storm (Blast): This is Ice Storm, but fire-flavored.
* Obsidian Flow (Blast): It does a little damage, but is mostly a grab-bag of control.  Needing to pass a strength check to remove entangle implies it is the kind of entangle where they can’t move at all without spending an action to remove entangle - that’s spending your action to make several enemies lose actions and take damage. Acrobatics penalties on their own are not terrific, but combine it with a spell that makes a creature have to roll acrobatics to not trip while moving, like Sleet Storm, and this can shut down the concept of walking entirely.  The acrobatics penalty might stack with Winter Grasp.
* River of Wind: Like blast of wind but not size-limited. It only applies at the start of a target’s turn, don’t count on it working twice despite the round/level duration. Sane enemies just won’t let it work twice and a 5’ wide line isn’t that hard to avoid.  Forced movement and standing from prone can waste enemy actions and give your side AoOs, so there are uses for this, but you’re unlikely to get more than two creatures in a line, and fort save negates the only effects we’re really after.
* Rising Water✰: How do your enemies feel about fighting underwater? Let’s find out! Fantastic in rooms with typical 8 foot high ceilings.  No save, no SR, no hope for non-swimmers.  Even if they can cast, good luck with verbal components underwater.  A 20’ radius cylinder of ‘guys in plate armor with greatswords suck’ definitely has its uses.  Combine this with Freedom of Movement and Air Bubble for your martials or polymorphing your animal companion to something with a swim speed.  Block the enemy in with bodies or using wall spells if you have to.
* Rope Tornado: Probably the best of the air blast spells at this level because it’s a reflex save rather than fort, but it doesn’t move enemies if that matters. It does have a chance of taking poor flyers out of the sky, but they have to also fail the ref save.
* Thirsting Entanglement (Debuff): Unless you really want to leave your enemies to slowly drain to death, or you can stack it with Thorny Entangle, you can basically get the same effect out of just casting Thorny Entanglement.
* Wall of Brine: If your GM allows use of racial spells, this is potentially a one-way door to those creatures that have no inherent swim speed.  The one-way nature of the spell makes this effective for throwing out summons or waiting for damage over time spells to do their thing.
* Spike Stones: Essentially a slightly improved version of Spike Growth, this spell’s ability to do damage per square moved through can potentially do absurd damage to an enemy stubborn enough to force their way through, and they halve their movement speed just for trying. With a 20-foot square per level, this can cover a huge amount of terrain with hidden spikes to thwart large numbers of walkers from ever reaching their target.  That said, except for the amount of damage and ability to be used on root-less terrain, Spike Growth is a lower level spell that fills the same role over the same area.
	Buff
	* Concealed Breath: Inferior to life bubble in all situations.
* Absorbing Inhalation: Cancel a range of cloud-like effects. You won’t have this spell prepared unless you have a reason to expect those, but it’s effective enough if you do. But… dispel magic would be almost as good, possibly even better if there isn’t somewhere convenient to exhale the cloud. 
* Baphomet’s Blessing: Give your animal companion a gore attack with a +2 enhancement bonus.  This is presented as a debuff, but we all know single-target save negates SR: yes touch spells that give a melee powerup to your melee-range enemy would be a bad idea, right?  Against a humanoid wizard/sorcerer/arcanist/witch only, this can be a poor druid’s Feeblemind because fort save is better against them specifically, but otherwise, use Moonstruck from a distance for this kind of thing.
	Debuff
	* Moonstruck: The best effect of this spell is that it causes the target to be unable to cast or make other actions that require patience or concentration, as per rage.  This means it can shut down a mage… that fails a single-target will negates.  You can target a dumb brute type from a distance (maybe from ambush) because they’re more likely to fail the save, and hope they attack the mage, instead, but it’s leaving the mage the chance to try to dispel it… You really should avoid using single-target save negates spell at SL 4.
* Slowing Mud: Slow is a solid debuff that isn’t crippling, but few things are immune to.  You don’t get Slow, but you do get Slowing Mud. This is Slow, but now it’s a fort save, it’s also blinding, and there are ways to remove the debuff.  If the target wants to spend their actions undoing a spell whose only purpose is making the enemy lose actions, they’re welcome to try.  It’s not as all-purpose as Slow, but this is a crippling debuff if it works.  This spell is targeted and not an AoE control spell, so it works on fliers.
* Zone of Foul Flames (situational): A weird “you have activated my trap card” spell you need to prepare ahead of time (but only minutes ahead of time) and hope the opponent won’t notice.  Also, hope they didn’t do something like give themselves immunity or at least Resist Energy for fire.  I guess you can surprise a Fireball specialist sorcerer or a pyrokineticist?  You might be able to use this once in your whole career?  Can you use elemental spell metamagic to make this affect other elements?
	Blast
	* Aggressive Thundercloud, Greater: Oh boy, a single-target spell that doesn’t just give one save and SR to negate, but a second to remove the stun that is the only reason to cast this spell over Ball Lightning! It is still so slow monsters can easily outwalk it, and flying enemies are becoming more of a problem at this level.
* Ball Lightning: Multiple balls with a ref save that has a -4 penalty to the save make this a good chassis for dazing spell delivery against humanoids wearing armor, or against fliers since this can reach them while Flashfire cannot.  The balls are still too slow to actually chase anything, however.
* Caustic Blood: This can be a lot of damage if some enemy with a bunch of attacks gets cornered into attacking you. Like, enough to burn through a protection from elements (acid) spell. 
* Explosion of Rot✰ (Debuff): A smaller-radius Fireball’s worth of damage that comes with 1d4 rounds of stagger to justify it being SL 4.  Goes to 15d6, so it’s like it’s already intensified Fireball, and if you intensify this one, it goes to 20d6, and also the damage is untyped so you don’t have to worry about resistances. Maximize it to get a 90-damage, 4 round stagger spell.  Maximize intensified for up to 120 damage at level 20.  Druids aren’t the best blasters, but this is as straightforward as blasting gets for a druid.
* Flame Strike: A smaller-radius Fireball’s worth of damage that does not do anything to justify it being SL 4. Doing half damage from divine source is not really as useful as Paizo seems to think, as the objective is to avoid having any damage resisted.  Try using elemental spell to find a lack of resistance, or just use Explosion of Rot, instead.
* Flaming Sphere, Greater: Like Aggressive Thundercloud, there’s little reason to put all your eggs in a very slow-moving basket that can be avoided by a ref save and then out-walked before it gets another chance to be used.
* Geyser: Dazing spell can make weak blasts look good, and geyser’s low damage over time to a potentially large area looks really good when it comes with daze for 4 rounds each time it does damage. It’s concentration, so you can hypothetically keep it going for indefinite periods of time, especially if you made a (very expensive) scroll for a familiar to read. Without that there’s not a lot of reason to use geyser.
	Heal
	* Cure Serious Wounds: 20-something points of damage healed isn’t enough to use in combat, and it’s inefficient for most uses out of combat, but that’s not to say there’s no use for it. It’s just very situational.
* Reincarnate: The lowest-level version of resurrection.  This one comes with the fun-fun gameshow element of a random creature you turn into.  Sing along, now: “Wheel of Karmic Rebirth, spin-spin-spin!  Give us a new body to live in!” Great fun for humans that put their racial +2 ability score into a mental ability.  Try to get some neat racial abilities while keeping the feat.  Due to the way that death is mainly a hit to the wallet in Pathfinder, if you get a “bad roll” on your reincarnation, your buddies can afford a “reroll” via slitting their throats and having you cast this again with all the money you save on this one compared to Raise Dead.  You also get to keep any mental bonuses from old age, but physically return to young adulthood to negate the penalties.  “Immortality” is just a death away with a druid around!  Check the notes on staves to see a discount way to keep being reborn…
* Spindrift Spritz, Mass: There’s wide area fear effects where it may be useful to stop shaken before it stacks to frightened. If possible it’s still better to use CL 1 Remove Fear in advance, by scroll or otherwise. A reroll on saves vs. staggered is harder to replicate, but also less often useful.  Scrolls can’t be used for immediate actions, and SL 4 is where scrolls get really expensive, anyway, so this is something you need to actually prepare.
	Summons
	* SNA IV: The thing SNA gets that Summon Monster doesn’t at this level is the satyr, who’s mostly notable for some SLAs.  You can get at-will Suggestion if you have need to spam that, and the save DC is good enough for commoners, although not as high as yours.  Tigers are the best direct damage option at this level, with a much stronger pounce than leopards from SNA III.  A pack of leopards can out-damage a single tiger, however.  You get medium elementals at this level, as well, which are significant upgrades if you’re using them for combat.  Earth elementals are tough and can move through walls to scout out dungeon rooms ahead of you, while air elementals have phenomenal flight speed for scouting, although for pure scouting, consider getting 1d3+1 air elementals to go in different directions.
* Flame Steed: Phantom steed with energy resistances, allowing you to use it in difficult environments; it probably won’t last long enough in a fight to use its little breath weapon. Of course druids don’t get phantom steed at all so may use it directly for overland speed.  Then again, druids can turn into migratory birds for hours on command, so this isn’t as impressive to them, and you really want Phantom Chariot to move the whole party at once.  It’s (creation), not (summoning), so you can’t use it for Alter Summoned Monster.
	Utility
	* Air Walk: Flight which doesn’t take the fly skill, and which lasts for hours. Yeah, clerics and druids have an edge over their arcane counterparts here.
* Animal Ambassador: Make a singing bear telegram service.  There’s a large amount of cultural/GM variance in how an intelligent goose knocking on the door and asking if Mr. Jones is in will play out.  Consider less tasty-looking animals for this mission.  This spell can be useful purely for communication for the total hermits who are known in the local area for communicating by messenger moose, but it is a little too conspicuous to use talking bears for intrigue missions.  Hypothetically, you can have intelligent messenger pigeons deliver secret messages only to the right recipient in a city without raising too many eyebrows, however.
* Cape of Wasps (Summon): If you can’t decide whether you want flight or revenge on those who attack you, you can cast Cape of Wasps rather than Air Walk or Caustic Blood. It’s much weaker than either as is the case with most dual-use spells however.
* Claim Identity: Hours/level alter self without the limit on imitating real people is pretty good. For when you can’t just turn into a bird to spy, and need to really look like you belong there.  Knock out the enemy before use and it probably doesn’t give a save.
* Dispel Magic: There are a bunch of higher level druid spells which are actually cleric spells with a spell level penalty. They’re usually among the better cleric spells so you still cast them… but you don’t feel good about it.  You can cast it if needed, but try to get the casters that get it as an SL 3 to use their slots if you can.  Dispel Magic can reverse the vast majority of bad effects that hit your friends unless there’s a line explicitly saying Dispel Magic doesn’t work.  It has a caster level check, but this is still one of the better spells to spam outside battle.  Get a significantly upleveled scroll (like CL 30 written by a cleric) if you can for emergency bad stuff removal in the late game to handle some of the dispel checks you otherwise can’t handle.
* Echolocation: Blindsight is a very powerful sense, allowing you to accurately target creatures you otherwise cannot see, making spells that negate all light such as Deeper Darkness useful, or just staying inside the cave floor and stabbing people up through their feet with Flame Blade if you use Earth Glide without the miss chance for being blind while being immune to counterattack.  10 min/level means you can have this as a ring of continuation spell.
* Earth Glide: You move very slowly, and you only get rounds/level, but you can move through solid stone, not just burrow like many of your animal shapes.  If you’re not trying to go through solid stone, use wildshape for something with burrow, instead.  It’s hard to beat “inside the floor” as a hiding place, and you can bypass chunks of dungeon by just walking through the walls.  Remember that you’ll need to find a way to get the rest of your party back to you, however.
* Grove of Respite: Creating a good campsite and including a couple of low level spells as well (goodberry and alarm) may be worth it at later levels, if there isn’t a wizard handy. Kind of obvious in the wrong environment however - expect to attract attention in the Abyss.  Sylvan Hideaway is a better hidden bunker in dangerous areas, so only use this if you’re in a relatively safe area and want to watch the stars.
* Shield Speech, Greater: IME groups who want to do something like this arrange for an obscure language shared by the party, but an actual counter to scrying might be useful in some campaigns.
* Cloud Shape: Gaseous form isn’t generally useful, but this could work for hiding out among real clouds while you Call Lightning down on the enemy. That’s a tactic likely to irritate both the GM and the other players however. A sylph-only spell by default and it’s not a good enough spell to be worth pushing the point.
* Warp Metal (Debuff) : It’s Warp Wood, but for metal stuff.  It can do all the same things Warp Wood does, like “lock” and “unlock” doors (or “doors”) with the added benefit that a steel slab is a lot harder to bash down than a wood barricade, and massive iron gates can be annoying to beat down.  You can warp metal weapons, but the targets get a save, and you only inflict -4 to melee weapons, which is likely not worth the action unless you’re facing a truly overwhelming number of opponents.  You should logically also be able to warp metal armor, however.  The spell doesn’t really go into the idea because it’s just copying Warp Wood, and the writers of that spell didn’t consider wood armor, but if you use the rules for breaking objects, that should halve the AC bonus of the armor and double the ACP.  If you’re up against a bunch of knights, making them all suddenly unable to make acrobatics checks on your Ice Slicks and reducing their AC by 5 is worth something..
	Protection
	* Life Bubble: If you’re tossing around spells where simply using spells like Delay Poison and Ashen Path aren’t enough, or you want to survive in the vacuum of space or the depths of the sea for a while, Life Bubble is a comprehensive way for a party to survive nearly any environment.
* Freedom of Movement: Also known as “Freedom from Druid Spells” for how many of your best control spell effects this spell negates.  This spell protects anyone in its effects immune to a huge list of effects.  At least by casting it on your allies, you can make them immune to your control spells so the barbarian can finally go have fun charging monsters in your Burning Entanglement after getting their layer of Resist Energy (fire).
* Master’s Escape (Summons): Handy for getting away from cunning enemies who got past your wall of summons, but you need to have set it up in advance which severely limits its use. Alternately, charge-pounce as a dire tiger, then swap back with your summons that fell behind so they can full attack, and then charge them again on your next round. Druids are otherwise light on teleportation spells so you might want Master’s Escape anyway.  Nothing restricts distance after you cast this spell so long as the summon is still alive, so you can have your Alter Summoned Monster small air elemental scout run for it while you distract the threat.
	Beastmaster
	* Atavism: It’s a hefty buff but losing all tricks other than attack would be awkward for some animal companions.  If animals have intelligences above 2, such as with ASI on an animal companion or it’s an Awakened animal, they can be smart enough that this restriction might not matter, and Altered Summon Monsters that are animals don’t have tricks to lose. It’s not polymorph, so you can stack advanced template on top of polymorphing.
* Giant Vermin: By the level this is available, insects like these are completely useless as actual combatants.  At best, these are speed bumps that exist solely to make an enemy waste an action attacking because they occupy a square they cannot walk through otherwise.  Even at the higher levels, it’s questionable if you can get an enemy to waste more actions splattering your bugs than you spent spreading and then creating them.  Spiders are notable solely if cast as a “downtime” spell because their webs are permanent, non-magical speedbumps that can last past the duration of the spell and bog down a creature with repeated entangles if they don’t waste actions swatting the webs away.
* Sea Stallion: For most druids wild shaping into something aquatic and casting Sea Steed or Water Breathing on their animal companion does all of this spell and more. There may be some nature fang druid who wants Sea Stallion, but for the average druid this spell may as well not exist.
* Phantom Hunt: This says “hunt”, but +40 foot move speed for hours/level for you and your animal companion can be used for far more than just tracking.  Flying pouncers love this. This allows for blistering overland speeds with other druid buffs.  Of course, if you’re tracking someone, this spell is practically unfair to whoever you’re hunting, allowing you to follow them at twice the rate they can run…
* ✰Strong Jaw✰: You are capped at only one “real” change in size and one “effective” change in weapon size, and most spells only give one size change at a time.  This spell giving two “effective” weapon size upgrades, essentially doubling damage, makes it a notably more potent spell than most of its type, even if natural attacks on their own are not the most powerful.  This spell works on every natural attack the target has, however.  This includes you while in wild shape, remember.  Get freaky with polymorphs, and this can stack a lot of damage.
	Information
	* Ancestral Memory (buff): Failure means you “merely” get a +5 Int-based skill bonus.  Generally, spells that add more information are justification for being able to reroll failed knowledge checks if you need to know important details related to the quest’s plot, and this comes with a hefty bonus.  If the percentile roll is successful, however, the spell basically amounts to the GM giving you an extra hint on the current problem, although how helpful that is depends on the GM.
* Forest Sense: Scrying, but as a standard action and you don’t need anything more than a footprint to target someone.  Since you can hear normally in the area as with Clairaudience, a high perception score means you can target a different creature nearby and just “happen to overhear” the target you want.  Plus, if they succeed at the save, you can try again without waiting 24 hours.  It works well as a way to learn more about a target for future Scrying.
* Scrying: It’s probably the most iconic knowledge-gathering spell, allowing players to spy in on nearly anyone.  (And being one of the spells that GMs actually reliably use against players to justify BBEG knowledge of PC actions.)  Druids lack Teleport to perform the classic “scry and fry”, but this still can provide quest-solving information if you know the right person to spy on.
* See Through Stone: Concentration required limits the use of this spell severely, but it does have some use in seeing through a wall without either putting your nose where it can be seen and alerting enemies, or using a possibly low-perception disposable scout summons to do the same.  Use it to set up your plans for kicking in the door if your scouts reported a big threat, or to just position earth/magma/mud elemenatls to earth glide ambush the enemy.
* Traveling Dream: An arcane eye that you can only use when you’re asleep. Oh…kay. Greater Insect Spies is directly better but also a couple of levels higher; Traveling Dream is useful in those places where invisible spies who can’t deal with doors are.
* Watchful Animal: How to use your animal companion or familiar as an effective scout, and know when they’re in trouble. This spell doesn’t on its own help you do anything to save the companion or familiar, but it does at least let you know you should do something.
* Aerial Tracks: Being able to track flying creatures is a neat trick, especially when enemies think they’ve done something really cunning by taking to the air and don’t bother with other countermeasures. It should also give enough data to target Faerie Fire on enemies which are both invisible and flying.  (GMs, remember this when a wizard thinks Greater Invisibility and Fly are the best combo ever…)
	________________
