# 3rd Level Spells

3rd Level Spells
	Control
	* Aqueous Orb: Sweep up your enemies and clean the floor at the same time! No dependence on terrain which is nice for a druid control spell, but it still won’t affect flying enemies. Being entangled and underwater, and unable to leave the orb is a thorough debuff.
* Ash Storm: It’s Sleet Storm, but fire-flavored.  It’s also much more easily described in terms of being “ash” for Ashen Path to negate it if your GM disagrees that applies to sleet, and Feather Step negates difficult terrain, so your allies can be immune to this spell while it shuts down the enemy.
* Burning Entanglement✰ (Blast): Considering the time it might take to escape, and the smoke preventing targets doing much to those outside the area, this is more lethal than the 4d6 damage/round might suggest. Be warned that this looks like an excellent way to start a forest fire which as a druid you might rather avoid.  A dazing spell version can basically eliminate any chance of escape after a single failed save. If your allies have Resist Energy (Fire) on and Feather Step, note they can be relatively safe to wade into this one.
* Ice Spears: At CL8+ against a large or larger enemy this is a surprisingly reliable trip, especially in icy or snowy areas. The spears remain after the initial damage/trip and can provide cover but this isn’t often useful.
* ✰Plant Growth✰: Only usable in limited terrains (until you have an Evergreen Seed Pouch), but when it works Overgrowth just shuts down enemy movement without offering spell resistance or saves, while boosting Entangle and Wall of Thorns DCs to boot. Very crippling when paired with Ash Storm or Sleet Storm. Make sure to use Freedom of Movement to avoid affecting allies.
* Shifting Sands: It’s a larger area than Aqueous Orb and not limited by target size, but the effect isn’t as strong. It is essentially like a smaller Entangle combined with a larger Grease. Still handy when you have a lot of enemies to sweep away.
* ✰Sleet Storm✰: It’s a massive-area combination of the best effects of Fog Cloud and Grease in one.  This is one of your best means of shutting down any ability to make ranged attacks or move out of the area while you set up further nasty surprises for the enemy.  This is a gold standard of control casting at mid-levels.
* Spike Growth: Difficult terrain is great, but it can’t stack extra difficult terrain on top, and what self-respecting druid accepts merely halving enemy speed?  If the enemy steps on Spike Growth, they get halved movement speed, which is not the same as/stacks with difficult terrain.  Against creatures with 30 move speed, quartering means “becomes 5 feet as a move action”.  Ouch, indeed.
* Thorny Entanglement: It’s Burning Entanglement for druids that don’t want to burn the forest down, or are facing something that resists fire.  The 15-foot range (from the edge of the already huge radius of Entangle) gives this spell an absurd battlefield footprint reaching out 110 feet in diameter.  They need to make attack rolls, so this is not as capable of damage, but this spell technically can also shoot down fliers if you have a low ceiling.  Dazing Spell can technically make this either a ref save or will save depending on whether the attack roll had to be made to do the damage, but with 3 rounds of daze, anything that fails one save probably won’t survive making three saves in a row to try to escape.
* Wind Wall: Say no to arrows, no save or attack roll required. Your own spells aren’t affected for the most part, so this is how to win an archery duel. Also keeps out swarms, flying fairies and other nuisances, and can be used to do the famous Marilyn Monroe shot.  If you don’t need to blow a paper out of someone’s hand, there isn’t much but duration that depends on you casting it, so consider getting this as a scroll from a hunter to save cash if you can to keep a means of blocking all ranged attacks off you so you can summon without concentration checks from being pincushioned.
* Woodland Rune: Boobytrap the area about your home; it’s permanent and has no material component, so you can spam this with impunity during downtime days to create a control minefield that doesn't take up your spell slots on days when you actually fight. 10 minutes is too long to cast it in combat obviously but it can be used to prepare an area - notably it doesn’t require pre-existing vegetation and doesn’t suggest the vegetation it creates goes away, so this can prime the area for Entangle or similar.  Ask your GM if Feather Step counts as close enough to woodland stride to ensure your animal companion or other companions don’t accidentally trigger your minefield.
	Buff
	* Animal Aspect, Greater: A selection of minor buffs to choose from. If you want a climb speed or a swim speed or +20’ land speed, or some minor skill bonuses you can cast this spell to get them without losing your hands or voice. Competence bonuses can be gained from skill-boosting magic items, so this may not stack.  Spells like Spider Climb and Touch of the Sea can give movement modes at lower level.  This is really only useful for if you can’t get the competence bonuses otherwise or versatility in a single slot.  This is a polymorph so it doesn’t stack with wild shape.
* Carrying Wind: At 5th-9th level this is a very weak fly spell or a weaker version of Greater Longstrider (which is the same level and on the druid list too). Later on the bonus to your fly speed increases to 20’ or even 30’, and it lasts longer than haste.
* Channel the Gift: If one character has to cast a lot of spells that aren’t on your list, this can be useful, like a spell-slot based pearl of power 3.  Note that this spell can be cast from a scroll if you need to cast several spells that benefit from a high caster level or save DC it can apply to, while this spell’s caster level doesn’t matter, and a scroll is much cheaper than a pearl of power 3 if you aren’t going to need it that often.
* Cleromancy: A good combo for the fate’s favored trait.  Adding a floating set of bonuses to any d20 roll can be useful in a huge range of situations.  As a personal spell, you can technically give this to your animal companion, as well.
* Collaborative Thaumaturgy: Save top-level spell slots while casting high-powered spells at very high levels, when your SL 3 slots don’t matter as much.
* Feather Step Mass: For if you want all your friends to walk through the difficult terrain you cause, and one SL 3 spell is less valuable than several SL 1s to you.
* ✰Fey Form I✰: Do you like using your scimitar or other weapons?  Like the idea of polymorphing, but don’t want to lose all your items?  Did you take an archetype that gives away wildshape entirely?  Why not turn into an Erlking (to fly), Ijiraq (for natural attacks), or boggle (to get +2 dex instead of strength for being small)?  Better yet, why not turn your animal companion into something else, because it’s a personal-range spell?  This is the start of the serious polymorph options for your animal companion, and due to their inherent high stats but low number of natural attacks or usable abilities, polymorphing them can add a wide range of new abilities to your woodland friend.
* Free Spirit: Freedom of Movement (or as I call it, “Freedom from Druid Spells”) is a powerful, terrible spell to be on an enemy.  It negates the majority of good druid control spells, which are often focused on terrain.  Still, unilateral disarmament is not wise.  The penalties here are bad for martials or gishing, but anyone just casting is going to ignore most of them.
* Longstrider, Greater: +20 land speed or +10 to any type of speed, and it lasts for hours.  Personal range means you can also cast it on your animal companion.  When you’re higher level and don’t need SL3s for control spells as much, this is a solid spell to put on your pouncing animal friend or yourself if you need to charge-fly to pounce.
* Plant Growth: This is an instantaneous spell, which means the plants are non-magical after being cast. The rules for undergrowth are technically different from difficult terrain, and can provide cover (for stealth and mitigating ranged attacks) while possibly stacking movement costs.  Because they’re permanent real plants, you can cast this on a totally different day than you expect a battle and not have the slot consumed on the day you fight. With Green Caress, this spell is murder.
* Scale Spikes Greater: Note that spiked armor counts as a manufactured weapon, so if you use this, your natural attacks (or your animal companions’) become secondary natural attacks and take a notable penalty.  You also need to use TWF to use these, yourself, if you polymorph into a form with scales and where you use a weapon.
* Vampiric Hunger (healing): So, OK, this is either stupid or completely broken depending on how much you’re willing to cheese it.  Using this as a mid-combat spell is stupid, it doesn’t help you actually pin anything and the trivial amount of HP you can recover isn’t worth the action to cast this spell mid-battle.  Using this as a debuff on your enemy is also stupid, it doesn’t really hurt them at all until minutes later, by which point the battle is over, and there are MUCH better tricks to use if you’re going through the hassle of trying cast social engineering spells on an enemy and then stalk them.  Using this pre-battle as a way to heal your allies to full and give them up to their max HP in temporary HP (AKA doubling their HP) right before a big fight is a pretty good buff.  You just need… sacrifices you are willing to make.  Fortunately, the spell doesn’t specify much about valid targets, so if you don’t have some helpless peasants or took prisoners in your last battle, you can just use a wand of Mount to create horses with 17 Con you can drain ~7 times before they poof away, giving your allies about 35 HP or temp HP each horse.  Since you can make the horse accept the bite, they don’t have to have any feats in grappling for this.  Because you probably want to prepare this spell in a slot (not as a scroll because of duration), just for healing, this is less efficient (but faster) than something like your boots of the earth or Infernal Healing, so you do this to either heal very fast or get those temporary HP before a big fight.  Consider extend spell (possibly via lesser rod) to make these temp HP last long enough to be useful.  Remember that druids can’t cast [evil] spells if either they or their deity is good-aligned.
	Debuff
	* Heatstroke: Tap someone once and they are fatigued at least. Tap them twice and they are exhausted. Fun way to make someone’s day awful.  You can put this in spell storing weapons, as well.  Just remember that exhausted on its own is not going to win fights, you need to either completely drop an ability score to 0 to knock them out, or you should look for a more crippling debuff.
* Nauseating Trail: If you don’t have an arcane caster in the party to cast Stinking Cloud for you, this is the next best thing.  Get something fast whose actions don’t matter much, like a small air elemental, to run rings around the enemy or zigzag down the path they have to take to reach you.
* Sheet Lightning: It’s dazing spell a level earlier than you’d get with metamagic.  Too bad it only lasts one round, you really want rounds/level, even if they get a save every round.  Dazzle is a terrible consolation prize for a successful save, and it does basically no damage.  You can do worse than a round of daze with your control spells, and it works on flying monsters some of your spells can’t reach, which can force several of them to fall. Being instantaneous, your allies also aren’t likely to be blocked off by your spells.
* Spit Venom: Ranged touch, 1 round of blindness no save on a hit isn’t terrible, and poisoning an enemy on top of that (Fort negates) can be well worthwhile. It’s a SR: no spell as well (though many creatures with SR are immune to poison).  As an SL3 touch attack spell, this can arguably be used with a spell storing weapon to inflict no-save blind on a hit.  A rogue will love a spell-storing weapon that does that.
* Spotlight: You can shut down a shadowdancer pretty hard with this spell, but the fact that you need to target a creature to hit it with a spell that prevents stealth means their stealth wasn’t good enough to start with, or they already launched their surprise attack…
* Thunderstomp Greater: This is good for druids that wild shape to huge and put feats into maneuvers.  Except, those druids are probably going to have higher strength than wisdom, anyway…
	Blast
	* Bone Flense: If sawtooth sabers or Red Mantis assassins aren’t available, you can always Vermin Shape yourself and/or your animal companion into a giant mantis.  Does this spell’s damage apply to every attack by a mantis claw for rounds/level, doing CLd6 each hit?!  That seems like it has to be wrong, but that’s what it seems to say.  Just be aware a single-target fort save negates is rather unreliable, but a full attack on someone who fails the save will render them into a fine red mist.
* Flashfire (Control): Terrible as a pure damage spell, this spell is great as a chassis for dazing spell.  It’s round/level damage over time based on reflex saves where you target specific tiles to inflict the damage without too much risk of including your allies in the blast or the massive amount of risk of your allies being entangled by Burning Entanglement.  Spending concentration on the spell lets you spread more daze to hunt down any survivors with pinpoint precision.  Its low damage means Resist Energy can stop accidental fire spread from dazing them.  And hey, I’m sure the forest needed a good “controlled” burn.  It’s healthy for the forest, honest!
* Iron Stake (Debuff): Only worth using on DR/cold iron enemies as a means of sickening and possibly preventing annoying SLAs.  As a damage spell, this is simply substandard, even if it has no save.  Not to be confused for Iron Spine, a vastly better spell that sadly isn’t on the druid list.
* Swarm of Fangs: Not actually a summons - more a flaming sphere/aggressive thundercloud which does untyped damage, and takes 1 round to cast.  Unlike Flaming Sphere, this one doesn’t give a save to negate damage, and it moves twice as fast so it’s harder to out-walk.  
	Heal
	* Accept Affliction: Know how druids gain venom immunity, which makes them immune to all poisons?  Know how Delay Poison doesn’t cure poison, it just keeps it from impacting the target until the spell runs out, but the poison is still there?  Notice how this spell merely transfers the poison to you, and doesn’t have a clause saying effects you are immune to you still impact you?  If your buddies are hit with a bunch of poisons to the point where you’re worried they might die before you can do much about it when Delay Poison finally runs out, this is much better than Neutralize Poison on a druid with venom immunity, because there’s no caster level check, here.  If you have immunities to anything else (possibly through spells), the same trick works.  It’s instantaneous and SL 3, so there may be lower-level cures for most of the things on this list, however.  Keep a scroll of it if you have venom immunity, though.
* Delay Poison, Communal: If you are using Delay Poison to grant immunity to your allies against spells like Stinking Cloud your wizard is casting, you probably don’t need the full duration, so go ahead and split the spell to cover the whole party in one shot.  That said, consider an SL 1 hunter-made wand of Delay Poison, instead, and save the spell slot.
* Reinvigorating Wind: Many of these conditions can be cured by lower-level effects, and fascinated can arguably be ended just by screaming threats at someone, but stunned is generally a deadly condition that is hard to directly cure while only lasting 1-2 rounds.  A scroll of this spell (as written by a shaman so it’s SL 2) can be useful for your utility belt of bad condition removal scrolls.
	Summons
	* Callistria’s Guardian Wasps✰: Despite the name, this isn’t actually restricted to Callistria worshippers, it’s just a spell she made.  This is another swarm spell but with a huge difference: It can be cast days in advance of being triggered, while other swarm spells have durations measured in rounds.  In fact, there is no special duration for the swarm, the swarm lasts for days or until killed! Like with any spell that you can cast and still have in effect more than a day later, this is basically free magic in spell slot and action economy terms! What’s more, while it’s “as Alarm”, it is not an abjuration spell, so you can stack overlapping swarm traps on the same tiles for a ludicrous ambush that is basically guaranteed death for any non-caster.  Note the lack of (D)ismissability; you may prefer to make it a fleeting spell or prepare Control Vermin so you don’t have a rampaging plague of wasps in town after the actual target of your “sting operation” is dead.
* Leshy Swarm: It’s based on a rat swarm, which is the bad version of Summon Swarm at SL 2.  Hence, you shouldn’t bother unless you need something immune to electricity, poison, or other conditions they are immune to.  If you use elemental spell to create Electrified Entangle out of Burning Entangle and the wizard tossed Stinking Cloud over it, you can send in the leshies to gnaw the victims to death a little faster.
* Mad Monkeys: More hilarious than necessarily practical, this is a fairly potent swarm with 2d6 no-save damage, but being tiny means that the enemies can AoO them before they get in range, and they don’t have too many HP, so they’ll die fast if the enemy isn’t nauseated by the distraction ability.  The steal maneuver is based on your stats, but the much more critical distraction save DC is a flat 14.  Great at lower levels, but the lack of scaling makes this one taper off in utility as everything starts to be able to just ignore their damage and AoO them to death.
* Pocketful of Vipers: The intended use is an amusing anti-pickpocket spell, but as a druid your perception is probably high enough that pickpockets aren’t an issue. As a trap it’s not especially effective against real enemies, more a threat - if I got into your home and trapped the breadbox, what else could I do to you?  Consider using Guardian Wasps for a much deadlier surprise.
* Rain of Frogs: The save DCs are a little sad, but a refluffed centipede swarm doing Con damage poison is dangerous enough that few enemies will ignore it, while being quite hard to take out.
* SNA III: Leopards get pounce and rake for five attacks.  Crocodiles have good defenses, and can grab and death roll with their bite.  The alternative summon option (if allowed - it’s meant to be for Erastil worshippers only,) grants you rare celestial summons for SNA, and are solid ways to smack down fiends in a round by using smite evil to bypass DR.  Of course, summoning multiple small elementals to have more speedbumps the enemies have to waste actions running over is also a good use of the spell. If you worship one of the fey Eldest and took the option to summon fey instead of elementals, leprechauns offer significant utility with major image and fabricate at this level.
	Utility
	* Aversion (Situational): One of many weird social engineering spells in the enchantment school you typically use to mess with the behavior of commoners.  Like most enchantment spells, the effect is ruined if you are seen casting it, so maybe be wildshaped when you do it. (“It was the crow, I swear!”) Hypothetically, keeping someone away can be useful for plotting or hiding a crime, but this is single-target, so you either need to cast this a lot and both have every target fail and never get caught casting it, or you need to be keeping people away from a place only one character would ever bother visiting…
* Daylight: Sometimes you need bright light to hit a monster where it’s vulnerable, and daylight does that for you.
* Lily Pad Stride: Unless you are leading a very large following, this spell is just inferior to Hanspur’s Flotsam Vessel, which not only lets you move over water, but negates water hazards without requiring acrobatics checks and is lower level. Or just wildshape into a creature that isn’t bothered by water if you’re on your own, maybe?  Hypothetically, you can use it to create plants on the surface of water. (Although technically, algae might already be there?) If you use Create Water to make a small pond anywhere, this is potentially a way to set up Entangle in barren environments if you have the time to prepare the field, but you’re spending a SL 3 and need to have time to cast several spells to do it, while that evergreen seed pouch just works automagically.  Greensight can allow you to create concealment you can see through if you’re hiding in the water as a shark or something.
* Mirage: A weirdly restricted spell that seems like a lesser Mirage Arcana.  In spite of the spell’s name implying it works in deserts, it works in all sorts of places so long as the location of the spell is flat, and the image doesn’t give a save until they get close enough to spring your ambush.  (Consider Blend with Surroundings to hide near it.)  You can’t make buildings like a golden treasure dome, but you can make a fake version of a landmark your targets are looking for, like the entrance to a famous cave.
* Raven’s Flight: As a druid, even if you don’t have Fly, you have the ability to just turn into a raven for more than one round.  It’s a swift cast, but you need to spend your standard action just flying, so it might as well be a standard cast that moves you.  There is no protection from AoOs other than taking the withdraw action, so this is really a weaker self-only version of Phase Step.
* Share Language, Communal: For when you meet a tribe of alien creatures with a racial language, and you can’t just appoint one to be their ambassador to translate for you.
* Spider Climb, Communal: Fly is actually on tap at this level, but if you want to save spell slots, or are in tight enough spaces you can’t maneuver anyway, this can work.  
* Stone Shape: The lifeblood of sculptors that need to undo a mistake, this spell has some utility to adventurers as a means of creating instant walls or exceptionally sturdy barricades on the fly.  Crenelations can give ranged combatants improved cover for +8 AC if you need to fortify the end of a hallway, or just block it off entirely to avoid the fight.  Fine detail isn’t possible with this spell, but you might still use it during downtime to create rough shapes you can chisel down for RP purposes with a craft skill.  You can cast it several times to create individual pieces of potential moving parts that can then be assembled together with a little work.  You could fit a stone chest into the wall and floor by drilling holes in the wall and floor, having pegs the chest secures itself into the holes with from multiple directions, and then you can attach a hinge after sculpting a separate piece for the lid to create an immovable treasure chest, for example.  Construct individual components to elaborate traps with this and Wood Shape.  Like many ill-defined legacy spells, this one has few obvious uses, but hundreds of less obvious ones a player willing to spend enough time on it can apply to great effect.
* Sylvan Hideaway: If you don’t have a wizard to cast Rope Trick, this spell is a solid replacement.  It can get to 8 hour duration before Rope Trick does, and the door is absurdly resilient with 10 hardness and hundreds of HP, many monsters may be completely unable to break through, and the door may be tougher than the mountain it is put into, so you can use this as a fallout shelter.  Its interior size and furnishing is undefined, so work with the GM on that.  Just because it has a bad perception DC for the door with its “camouflage” doesn’t mean you can’t put it in a location nobody will look or actually cover it in camouflage netting.  This can be your home away from home for many adventures.
* Tail Current: Tailwind for in the water.  Arguably, boats and rafts (like Flotsam Vessels) are “underwater” enough for this spell if they aren’t sail-powered, but if your GM disagrees, there’s always Tailwind.
* Tailwind: This is a long-term speed buff for overland travel.  If you can get this to last 8 hours (easy with a lesser extend rod as soon as you get the spell), you can gain 16 more miles per day of travel using this spell, or up to 48 miles (+4 hexes) if you can keep it going all day for a vehicle that can travel 24 hours a day.  For naval campaigns, this is a way to guarantee your ship always has a favorable (or at least not deleterious) wind, and makes you wonder why every ship doesn’t have its own druid.  Using this spell can drastically cut down travel times, and thus, random encounters, or enable easier completion of time-sensitive quests.
* Water Breathing: You can turn into a fish if you want an all-in-one package for swimming and water breathing, but your party will struggle.  This is a “communal” spell where you can divide out the extremely long duration, which makes it easy to pass out the underwater exploration time.  If there’s combat in the water, you’ll definitely want something to help the others swim, however.
	Protection
	* Cloak of Winds: Moderate protection against ranged attacks, but as an untyped penalty, this stacks with any other AC bonus, including cover.  This is powerful protection against swarms of tiny creatures, however, as failure to save will fling whole swarms of tiny creatures significant distances away.
* Protection from Energy: Resist Energy is better as a general protection spell, but sometimes, you don’t need to survive several rounds of constant elemental attacks, you need to survive one huge blast.  Note that since you are immune to elements this protects against, as long as this spell lasts, it also protects against non-damage effects of elemental spells, such as sonic immunity giving immunity to [sonic] spells that inflict status effects like stun or paralysis instead of damage.
* Resist Energy, Communal: At higher levels, this spell is a staple.  You need to cover the whole party in resistance, but you probably wind up with more duration than you need per person with the single-target version.
* Vengeful Comets (Blast): Sort of like a delayed scorching ray spell which lets you spend immediate actions to take revenge on enemies who affect you with spells. It’s probably better to just blast enemies or to cast a real protection spell, but there’s cool value.
	Beastmaster
	* Anthropomorphic Animal: If you want your animal companion to pass for a skinwalker or something, here’s a way. There may be other advantages to turning your horse into a furry but I really don’t want to know about them.  It’s not harmless, and the animal form is pretty weak, so this is potentially a really weird debuff on animals?  Put it in a spell storing weapon, and turn an enemy cavalier’s horse into a horse-man, dumping the rider in the dirt?  Maybe turn a cat that witnessed a crime into a talking witness so the jury doesn’t just have to take the druid’s word that’s what the cat said?
* Bleed For Your Master: Technically it’s cheap and easy to replace an animal companion in PF1, and this spell takes full advantage of that. Improved evasion and improved cover as an immediate action is a lot of defense when you need it. Possibly best for a packmaster druid.
* Companion Mind Link: Depending on how your GM deals with animal companions, especially ones with 3+ Int, the ability to bypass the need to push your animal companion can be a relief… or redundant because your GM just lets it understand a language like the rules say.
* Dominate Animal: Dominate is a final word in “I want you to die for me” spells, and you get this earlier than Dominate Person on other creatures.  Animals don’t tend to have those important social structures where controlling one high-ranked member can grant a ton of power, but if you are just recruiting tyrannosaurs to toss at the enemy dragon as a meat shield, this is a way to do it.  It’s overkill if your GM lets you just talk a pack of dinosaurs into working for you at the cost of meat or Goodberries, though.  Call Animal -> Dominate Animal.  Pity it lacks that day/level duration of Dominate Person.
* Hunter’s Friend: Give your animal companion a grab-bag of useful druid or ranger class features.  Sadly, you need the feature yourself, so no giving them swift tracker to use their scent ability with it, or to get a class feature early, but you can have your animal companion get outright venom immunity, not just Delay Poison, or hours/level immunity to difficult terrain with woodland stride.  (I guess that’s one way to make your animal companion immune to your Woodland Rune minefield…) This can have a lot of weird interactions with archetypes if you traded away any of the class features on the list and the GM doesn’t ban it.  For example, cave druids can give their animal companion a +2 bonus to resist abilities of oozes and aberrations.
* Magic Fang, Greater: If you have a special purpose amulet of mighty fists, or if your animal companion lacks a neck item slot, this is a solid, long term buff. Even without those criteria it’s cheaper than an AoMF. In the event that your GM is okay with your finding a 20th level druid and a 9th level wizard you can get them to cast permanency on you for a huge buff, at least until some bastard enemy casts greater dispel magic your way.  Just keep in mind that overcoming DR is potentially even more important than otherwise to animals, because you can’t just trade in your claws for cold iron claws.  If you’re abusing Alter Summoned Monster, however, this might be a fantastic buff.
	Information
	* Create Treasure Map: Basically a plot hook in a can, for better or worse.  This is almost entirely up to the GM, so coordinate with them before you pull it on them.
* Insect Spies: This is essentially Arcane Eye for druids, and you get it a spell level early.  Unfortunately, beetles are not as invisible as the Arcane Eye, and their stealth checks are not as fantastic as you’d really think a literal bug should have.  That said, unless they can detect magic, most creatures aren’t going to respond to a simple bug by drawing their greatsword and trying to cleave.  You can hypothetically buff their skills or just cast Invisibility, however.  They need to survive the trip back to relay their knowledge unless you just Scry on the beetles to start with, so try to use them cautiously.  I had some get repeatedly eaten by spider swarms while trying to reconnoiter what turned out to be a drow base once. 
* Pack Empathy: A more vague version of cleric’s Status spell, this spell doesn’t affect enough creatures to really throw it on all your animal scouts, but you can use it to convey very basic ideas long-range, like whether they are under attack or if you are anxious for them to return and report back.
* Spectral Scout: Can it turn the candlelight off?  Glowing seems like a poor choice for a spy.  Otherwise, the fact that it has any skill ranks the subject has seems like a useful ability for a created creature.  Base it on the wizard’s familiar, what with all the skills that tiny animal can possess, and make a long-duration skilled operative.  If it’s incorporeal, it should be able to pass through walls.
* Speak with Plants: King Charles III wants this. Besides that, there’s plants in many places who can spy for you. As Ultimate Intrigue puts it, criminals may try to silence witnesses, but few criminals expect the potted fern in the corner to be used as a witness against them. Remember the difference between “plant” and “plant creatures” (which include things like vegepygmies or leshies) - the instructions about not improving attitude or terse or cunning creatures apply to plant creatures, which can often communicate without this spell, anyway.  Also, remember “plant” includes fungi and molds in Pathfinder terminology.  A typical plant is at least implied to be able to hear and smell by other spells, but what is within a plant’s awareness is extremely GM-dependent.  This can be awful or amazing in an intrigue game, depending on how the GM feels about willow witnesses.
