# 9th Level Spells

9th Level Spells
	Control
	* Antipathy: Get the fuck away, the spell! Great for defending points from specific individuals, or hiding your special one ring.
	Buff
	* Ascension: If you use your level 20 alternate capstone to obtain a minor artifact (or Sacred Geometry to apply Ascendant Spell), this spell becomes usable. Give your whole party 1 mythic tier of their choosing. Enjoy.
* ✰Shapechange✰: BECOME ANYTHING! EVERYTHING! Yes you might have wild shape but fuck, every now and then, it feels great to just become a dragon and make that everybody’s problem. And then become a water elemental. Then become a dinosaur…and then-... Casting this on your animal companion gives them a massive stat buff, huge number of attacks, flying, fear aura, immunity to an element of choice, and generally makes them at least competitive in late-game where they might otherwise be falling behind the game of rocket tag. Dragons can even swim, burrow, or Spider Climb on command.  The only thing dragons can’t do is pounce… but you know what does?  An allosaurus, which you can also turn into for one round as a free action just to get the charge/pounce/rake going because Beast Shape IV is also now on your list!  You can even use Giant Form II to turn into a troll for regeneration (the flavor of troll changes what elements are your weakness, and remember - you can’t die if regeneration is active) or a gegenees for a six-armed grappler or weapon user whose equipment doesn’t meld.  If you can somehow get a ring of continuation on them, the 10 min/level duration makes this a 24 hour buff on them.  (Regeneration now works between all battles.) Put it on both of you, and you don’t have to be whatever your base species was ever again!
* Threefold Form: Being in three places at once sounds good, but since the spell is clear that it doesn’t break the action economy it’s not actually amazing. It could be fun with a reach weapon and combat reflexes but single attacks don’t swing fights at this level.  The Threefold Aspect part gets in the way more than helps, as the bonuses are enhancement (and thus, anything that would help you is overlapped by belt/headband) and there are untyped penalties as well.  It also burns down your buff durations three times as fast.
	Debuff
	* Polar Midnight: The damage is nothing but the dex damage is pain and if they don’t move, they are immediately frozen…which includes if they CANT move and you have SO MUCH CONTROL NONSENSE this can be actually incredibly deadly.
	Blast
	* Clashing Rocks: Have you ever needed to drop a mountain on someone? Just doing damage (at least, only 20d6 damage…) is not noteworthy at this level, but it’s ref-partial SR:no that on a failed save trips and buries the enemy, which takes a DC 25 strength check to escape on their own.  Outside of the highest-strength brutes, this is practically a save-or-die.  Even if they save, a trip can be lethal, especially if they were already next to your party that’s flanking the big boss so you can pound it to death with full attacks while it’s down.  Just make sure you have clear lanes to have the rocks hit the target without mashing your party.
* Tsunami: No SR army smashing tidal wave!  It’s a maneuver, even if a maneuver with a +8, and it has the same problems with how hard late-game creature CMD scales all the wizard maneuver spells have, so you’ll probably have trouble hitting anything level-appropriate with this.  It’s good for flexing on armies of nobodies, though, or if you UMD a scroll of this much lower-level and use it as an “I win” button against a powerful (for the level) enemy.
	Summons
	* Elemental Swarm: You need to cast this at least twenty minutes before you expect to fight, because large elementals aren’t too potent at this level, but you might cast this a couple of times to assemble a horde of disposable punching bags without needing to spend actions summoning mid-fight.  This is a (summoning) spell with 10 min/level duration, so this is an SL 9 spell that provides half a dozen targets for Alter Summoned Monster if you just have a wand and make a small army of storm giants.  Even some pixies to Irresistible Dance spam can 100% shut down anything that lacks SR, but few things lack SR at this level.
* Summon Nature’s Ally IX: The list of options to summon is getting short now. Pixies with irresistible dance are… not exactly impressive, I can see someone casting SNA IX for a pixie and getting laughed off the battlefield, but if the enemy has no SR, this spell trades a summon’s action for the target’s round and throw a debuff even if they save, which against the few creatures still without SR at this level (maybe a high-level class level humanoid), is definitely worth it if you can summon them before battle (like with Elemental Swarm and Alter Summoned Monster) to avoid spending your own actions. Storm giants have useful SLAs with gravitas as well.  Constant Freedom of Movement and electric immunity means you can blast many of your control spells over them without them caring, and a +27 default attack bonus (more if you’ve invested at all in summoning augmentation) is solid enough to hit all by the beyond-CR 20 monsters reliably, which if the wizard includes them in the Haste, may result in some surprising damage. If you have Summon Plant Ally or are a follower of the Eldest then alraune, ankou and hamadryads all come with other useful magics, and some archetypes like goliath druid with alternate summons can make use of summoning diplodocus.  With the ring of natural attunement, Toshigami can also self-haste attack and has some crazy defenses and SLAs like Time Stop!  Or just get a mass spam SNA VIII’s elder elementals or SNA VII’s tyrannosaurs until there’s no floor space on the battlefield.
* Entice Fey, Greater: If you’re willing to pay then you can get all kinds of strange magics by dealing with fey.  It’s end-game, and you’re not going to carry your money to the next game, so you might as well splurge when you’re getting to the final showdown on some flashy backup.
	Utility
	* Temporal Regression: Create a restore point! This is a tricky spell to use, and the standard action to activate it with a standard action cast on a rounds/level is difficult to navigate.  You really want to cast this right before starting a fight, not in the middle of one.  Consider a greater extend rod if you plan to use it often.  You reset durations on all your other buffs, so cast this just after spamming all your best rounds/level buffs before kicking down the door for a tough fight to extend their durations.  You might need to UMD a scroll of Dimension Door or use Companion Transposition to get back to the fight if you moved too far from your buff point.
	Protection
	* Winds of Vengeance: The gold-plated flight and wind control spell rolled into one. Perfect flight, immunity to ranged weapons and the ability to knock prone enemies who attack you in melee by hitting them back with your immediate action is a reasonable package of buffs.  No SR is listed on this ability to knock enemies back, either.  You can probably get by with a lower-level spell and save the SL 9 slots for fight-winning spells in situations you aren’t using all the features, however.
	Information
	* Foresight: Never being surprised and always being able to use immediate actions, even before your first action, can be a literal lifesaver once the rocket tag nukes are brought out.  Druids have less immediately fight-winning SL 9 superspells than other classes that get this spell, so it’s a pretty solid choice.  As casting it as a personal/”target: you” spell is an option, you can make your animal companion a precog without you needing to warn them, too.
	



________________
