# 6th Level Spells

6th Level Spells
	Control
	* Jatembe’s Ire: This is a powered-up version of Black Tentacles, which is especially fun for druids because they didn’t get Black Tentacles in the first place.  The radius is so stupidly huge that aiming it may be a problem, but it only attacks based on alignment, so you might not need to care.  It’s useless against fliers or non-evil enemies, but this spell can win some fights all by itself.  Like Black Tentacles before it, the CMB doesn’t scale hard enough to keep up with CMD as you level up, so it eventually becomes incapable of helping even when fighting enemies it will attack, but this is an amazing spell when you first get it.
* Roaming Pit: Strange that you only get Pit spells now, after they’re already past their prime.  The big problem is that you’re fighting many enemies that are either too large for this spell, can just fly, or otherwise negate falling. Like Burning Sphere, it’s 20 feet of movement that takes your move action, so don’t cast this unless the enemy is already stuck in the tar pit.  Since ref saves mean the target moves, this can be a backdoor method of repositioning enemies for other allies, and if an ally bull rushes an enemy to the pit, they auto-fail the save.  Move fallen enemies into existing damage over time zones.  Depending on what you’re fighting, this can be fun or frustrating.
* Gravity Sphere (Buff/Debuff): You need to consult the planar traits rules for gravity to understand this one. Really awkward to use, as it’s basically either a buff or debuff depending on mode, but it’s too large an area to reliably avoid accidentally buffing the enemy, while too small to reliably keep an enemy in the debuff zone.  High gravity halves ranged weapon range and increases Pit spell damage by about 50%.  Low gravity theoretically increases ranged weapon range, but that only matters if you have someone with short-range throwing weapons or pistols. No gravity screws with non-fliers and lets you dunk on non-fliers with ranged attacks… but so does just flying, and flight spells have been available since at least SL 3.  This is way too high level for this kind of actual mechanical impact.
* Gravity Well: Most GMs don’t track weight on most enemies and Paizo made flight maneuverability completely meaningless, so this only matters against really clumsy fliers that can’t make a DC 25 fly check.  It’s fort negates, and a skill check with a DC the target can auto-succeed against is even worse than a save. Against non-fliers, you’ve had no-save options to halve movement speed since level one.
* Wall of Stone✰ (Utility): It’s instantaneous, so it’s a real, non-magic, non-dispellable, no save slab of stone. Like all walls, you can cut the enemy encounter in half to pick them off in smaller chunks at a time, and they can’t simply dispel real stone.  You can use this out of combat to build bridges, dams, aqueducts, terraced agriculture irrigation, or even walls for your own castle.  Like many legacy spells, this has a surprising amount of utility for non-standard uses if you’re just using it for building material along with Stone Shape and craft (stonework).  Tap your inner dwarven engineer.
* Tar Pool: At this level, you could be casting dazing Burning Entanglement, instead.  Outside of the higher initial damage, this spell’s entangle is worse than dazed and entangled, Burning Entanglement covers twice the area, and the ongoing damage is similar.  This does work where there are no plants if you GM bans the potted plant trick, and you can cast this if you never got dazing spell, but seriously, get dazing spell if you want to control cast as a druid…
	Buff
	* Fey Form III: You unlock huge fey at this level, but there’s only one of those - the tunche. Fortunately, it’s absolutely absurd with five attacks (plus rend) and a poison that inflicts Wis and Con damage, plus nauseate.  It also has DR 5/cold iron. This is a fantastic beast to turn yourself or your animal companion into, especially combined with air walk.  The only thing it’s missing is pounce… Also a few abilities are unlocked on smaller fey, most notably faster flight and a quickling’s supernatural speed (constant concealment), and you can become a tooth fairy if you want to be diminutive in size.
	Debuff
	* Blazing Rainbow (Buff/Blast/Control): This is two spells.  One gives you bow proficiency if you somehow wanted that and hadn’t picked it up already.  The longbow is not listed as composite (but maybe your GM will take pity on you for casting this?), so it’s just 1d8+1 damage, although it does ignore armor, shields, and cover.  Unless you have archery feats already, this is probably not worth it, and if you do, this only beats your normal bow if you just can’t hit AC without it (which might be better solved buffing your archery, not getting a new bow).  Dazzled is a worthless condition, and Faerie Fire doesn’t matter much if you can already target them outside of negating Blur.  The other spell is a bridge that comes online several levels past long-term flight spells.  If you can trick an enemy dumb enough to stand on a magic bridge, it debuffs their CMD, but you could also just cast it as a fleeting spell and dismiss it for a better effect when they’re over a chasm.
* Binding Earth Mass: It does damage between Spike Stones and Spike Growth, which are available at half this level, aren’t targeted, have a huge area, and target a better save.  Use those spells, instead.
* Source Severance: This is a selective version of Antimagic Field.  You technically have a choice, but casting a spell to negate your own (divine) magic is almost always going to do more harm than good, while negating all arcane magic within 5 feet of yourself while you can potentially cast without restriction (so long as you can make the concentration checks) is a fantastic advantage to hold.  If you cast this after your main buffs, you don’t have to roll concentration for those spells, either, and there’s no concentration check if you’re already in combat wild shape and just mauling people.  The only problem is that most monsters are going to be using SLAs that aren’t affected, so this is specifically for fighting spells from arcane caster class levels, and useless against the bulk of enemies you are likely to fight.
* Sirocco: Damage over time that can knock prone, and hypothetically swat fliers from the sky.  The problem is that DC 15 is a laughably low check for this level where you’d need to find something with a negative flight skill to reliably keep grounded.  It has no-save fatigue and exhausted if you can keep them in the blast, but this is otherwise fairly similar to Burning Entanglement from SL 3 except that it can hit fliers.  It might work well as a “topper” spell to stack more damage and conditions on creatures already bogged down in a Burning Entanglement to finish them off, but it’s hard to see too many creatures actually being caught in this spell without using some other spells to pin them in place, first.
* Plague Storm (Control): This is an escalation from Cloudkill’s mustard gas to biological weapons.  Unfortunately, diseases have effects on intervals measured in days, and you’re unlikely to be reaching a ceasefire so you can wait out the time it takes for the disease to do its damage once you’re hitting NBC rungs of the escalation ladder.  Also, creatures at this level that matter enough for the GM to bother tracking them past a fight will have easy access to Remove Disease. It does have an immediate onset, but even then, this is a small AoE 50% chance of blind if they fail a save with the best effect on this list.  1d4 or 1d6 ability score damage is not moving the needle at this level without a method of more concentrated ability score damage, and you can’t stack the same disease twice.  Many creatures are also immune to disease or have fantastic fort saves by this level, as well.
* Primal Regression: It’s like a temporary mass Feeblemind for casters that don’t get Feeblemind. Will save negate spells that inflict penalties to will saves are generally worse than just casting the spell that wipes the enemy out twice if they make the first save, especially at such a high spell level.  It can theoretically shut out casters, but they tend to have good will saves, and how often do you fight more than one caster within 30 feet of each other? It has a suggestion of RPing the victims as “bloodthirsty”, but that’s entirely in the hands of the GM.  The spell really needs a Confusion effect (or I guess, to just have someone else cast Confusion) after throwing this spell out there, as there’s nothing directing the “brutish anger” you just inspired and you otherwise just buffed someone you took a hostile act against and now they’re out for revenge, and there’s no reason for the targets to fight each other.  Like a lot of enchantment spells, this is really more of a social engineering spell that you would cast from hiding (along with Confusion) on a crowd of NPCs to start a riot rather than a combat spell.
	Blast
	* Fire Seeds: A ranged touch attack doing 10d4 fire damage would need some extra buffs to be a worthwhile use of your standard action now. If you happen to have humanoid mooks it’s useful perhaps. Maybe if you can convince some (possibly Awakened/upleveled) monkeys to throw them for you from the treetops? The holly berry firestarters aren’t going to be useful at all.
* Whip of Ants: If you’re casting a 6th level standard action buff it needs to be awesome. Whip of Ants doesn’t qualify; 3d6 damage isn’t as good as you might think when it’s your only attack and there’s no enhancement bonus. The DC 15 save on distraction isn’t worth having at this level.
	 Heal
	* Cyclic Reincarnation: Reincarnate which doesn’t destroy the mental image of your character is nice. It also fills the role of Resurrection for druids, being able to revive those longer dead, or killed by a death effect,  or who were reanimated as undead then destroyed. It costs 5K to cast which is half the cost of Resurrection, or as much as Raise Dead.  They also only gain one negative level, which means only 1k gp on Restoration and not having to wait a week to cast Restoration the second time… although you need either to UMD a scroll or have someone else case the Restoration.
	Summons
	* Eagle Aerie: Giant eagles fly fairly fast at base 80’, and just flying is useful to bypass obstacles. If you need to travel and can’t just teleport this is decent until Wind Walk becomes available next level. The eagles aren’t useful in a fight (CR 3) but if your GM doesn’t have conniptions the Alter Summoned Monster spell makes Eagle Aerie awesome.
* Liveoak: Treants aren’t awesome in a fight, but a spell you don’t have to cast on the day of the fight is almost like a free spell.  Unlike Changestaff, nothing in this spell says it’s not a real treant and that it can’t control trees.  Don’t send your treant in directly, just have it constantly control more trees and throw them into the woodchipper.
* SNA VI: Dire tigers with their 5 +18 attacks on a charge rule here. Well, the 20’ reach and 8-9 attacks on a giant octopus have a place, but +11-12 and much lower damage on those attacks mostly relegate it to the aquatic environments it prefers. Followers of the Eldest can call up escorites which have a hefty amount of magic to bring to the fight. These options are likely better than multiple lower level summons unless you just want meat shields.
* Summon Giant Ally I: Standard action summons (which are actually summons and all your feats like augment summoning apply) are far more convenient, and the ability to order your summons about (possibly even in Common) is more convenient still. It’s not like a stone giant is a match for a dire tiger in a fight but convenience is good.
* Summon Flight of Eagles✰: Like Eagle Aerie but the duration is poor for overland travel, even more awesome for Alter Summoned Monster.
* Swarm Skin; Standard action ‘summons’ and easy ordering them around are still convenient but this spell has the twin drawbacks of leaving you helpless, and being underpowered for the spell level. 3d6 damage per round just isn’t worthwhile at 11th level.
	Utility
	* Dispel Magic Greater: Magic rules, removing magic removes the enemies’ right to rule. Greater dispel magic can affect an area or remove all the buffs on the magicked to the gills gish you’re fighting, or all the usual tricks of basic dispel magic.  Also, you get this one at the same level as everyone else - equality makes it go down easier.
* Enlightened Step: The [meditative] spells are expensive and unwieldy even if they can give strong effects.  You need to prep it the day before; simply UMDing scrolls of Fly can be cheaper and more flexible; a druid that needs long durations of flight can also just turn into a bird; you can also just cast Air Walk directly and it already lasts hours.  Still, if you for some reason need to fly for very long periods of time in non-bird form, or have reason to need bursts of high flight speed as a swift, not standard action for exactly one battle in the day, this can deliver high performance at the cost of practicality.  Oh, and it’s personal range in case you wanted to give your animal companion day-long flight - they can probably get more use from it since they can’t turn into a bird so easily.
* Ironwood: You can carve yourself a wooden breastplate if you’ve somehow not been able to afford a dragonscale breastplate by this point.  You just need to recast it every week, hopefully during a downtime day.  It’s technically possible, but you should probably have a better solution to armor than this, like dipping a level of monk or wild dragonscale armor, by the time you’re level 11+.  Also, it still melds when you wild shape if you aren’t using Fae Form.  If you’re starting a one-shot campaign at high levels and say it was cast the day before the campaign starts, it can work, though.
* Move Earth: Instantaneous reshaping of the land.  Druids should probably be opposed to this kind of thing, at least except to “reverse ecological damage” or something, but you can use this with things like Wall of Stone to outright terraform the land if need be.  Make hills, carve out new river basins, make the landscape of your dreams! It’s fantastic for games where you build up a single town or kingdom, but impractical for campaigns focused on travel except as a way to dig trenches ahead of a battle.
* Transport Via Plants: Like with so many other spells, druids get their own tree-flavored version of Teleport a level later than the wizards do but with some perks on top.  Unlike Tree Stride, you can actually take your friends with you this time, it has unlimited range, and it doesn’t have a failure chance, so it can kind of be Greater Teleport if you don’t mind only jumping to places with living trees.  A surprising point where a druid can one-up the wizard, and maintain domination of overland travel (so long as you don’t need to go into a barren desert or underground… although giant mushrooms do count as “plants”...)
* ✰Spellstaff✰: This is practically a class feature. Don’t you know that at level 11, druids get a free extra spell of whatever level they want with their special spell stick?!  It’s utter nonsense, but it’s legacy nonsense, so take your pseudo-free bonded object and enjoy.  It probably still consumes spell slots on the day you recharge the spell stick, but if you adventure sporadically, this can be perfectly acceptable.
	Protection
	* Antilife Shell (Control): Theoretically, you can block off a passage with this.  Primarily, however, this is a way for a caster to sit still and cast without the big, scary monsters eating their face. For example, when you are doing a lot of summons and need to avoid failing concentration checks for damage.  Depending on how they attack, huge creatures can reach weapons past the shell, non-living or outsider creatures aren’t affected, and it doesn’t do anything against ranged attacks or spells, but in the (sadly increasingly rarer at this level) case that you’re fighting a melee natural-attack-only encounter, this is an invincibility field.  If you have a ranged or reach build that extends past the shell, you can grief some monsters to death.
* Dust Form: While it seems similar to something like Cloud Shape at first glance, you retain basically all your abilities besides doing full damage with physical attacks.  Diminutive (three categories less than medium) is able to squeeze into only six inches, which is pretty big for dust, but otherwise, incorporeal is a severely annoying ability to fight against, but fantastic to benefit from.  Natural attack druids won’t use it (it’s a polymorph that competes with their own shape changing), but casters or Flame Blade combatants can essentially use this to halve or possibly negate incoming damage.  The rounds/level duration is the huge downside, making it hard to cast before battle.
	Beastmaster
	* Bite The Hand, Mass (Summons): Hypothetically, if you’re up against a known annoying (squad of ) summoner(s), this could turn the tables on them, but… this spell only works on actual “summon” spells or SLAs, and the use case for this spell is if your GM is actually going to flood a hallway with a solid wall of summon spam against you.  Most tables will never see that use case.  Otherwise, just dropping a Greater Dispel Magic to wipe out the one or two summons you might see most GMs pull on you and also wiping out enemy buffs at the same time may be a safer choice of spell memorization.  At least most Summon Monster summons are low-level enough to generally have poor will saves, but fiends can summon other fiends that might have high enough will saves and SR to cause problems.
	Information
	* Find The Path: Unless you need to find your way through a maze this spell doesn’t obviously do much. The main issue with this spell outside the Maze spell is that it’s extremely up to GM interpretation how intelligent the magic satnav actually is.  This spell might just tell you to take a road, or this spell might give you enough knowledge to know which tree to use Transport via Plants upon to get to your destination the fastest.  If “the physical actions to take” include things like bashing down doors, casting spells to make bridges, or outright teleporting, this is a great spell for finding paths to places you don’t know well enough to get to without an overland journey.  If your GM only believes it works for plodding one foot over the other, it’s garbage.
* Insect Spies, Greater: This is a really good spying spell. Fleas and similar are really hard to spot, don’t trigger invisibility alarms, most people don’t just instantly go for the kill even if they see a fly, and you get actual information rather than just rerolls or secondhand info relayed through a flea.  You can use it like a multitasking Arcane Eye, swapping insects as they need to do things like fly to the other end of a hallway, and explore down multiple routes at once.
* Stone Tell / Speak with Waves: Very few places are entirely lacking in either stone or water so you have security cameras everywhere but on salty seas. Providing you’re specific enough in your questions (rocks may not know who the local lord is, but they can provide ‘complete descriptions’ which you should be able to use) you can get a solid picture of what happened at most locations.  Using this on rivers to understand everything that happens upriver without a stated range limit is an exceptionally difficult method of spying to prevent, and a spymaster might want to try that on rival nations…
* Unerring Tracker: Once you’ve found and identified a track, this spell lets you skip any further skill rolls to follow it. You’d think this should be a much lower level spell, but it’s possibly useful anyway.
	________________
