# 5th Level Spells

5th Level Spells
	Control
	* Cave Fangs; Cave Fangs creates a useful trap and is reasonably cheap. It’s best when you’re laying an ambush - the cost could mount up fast if you’re trying to protect a camp every day, and while it can be cast during a fight there’s better 5th level spells if you’re not taking advantage of its duration. It’s not clear what ‘pinned to the ground’ means, but it seems to indicate that you can’t move but have the entangled rather than the pinned condition.
* Hungry Earth: Cool effect but let down by a CMB which is below par at 9th level and only going to get worse from there. Maybe you’ll get lucky with it and steal the enemies’ next standard action, but probably not.
* Wall of Fire; A hazard which you can ping-pong enemies through with the right spells or combat maneuvers is fun. It doesn’t do enough damage that making enemies go through it once is worthwhile, but with the right setup once is only the beginning.  2d6+CL may not be enough damage to be worth the actions you spend on it unless the summons are the ones doing the ping-pong.
* Wall of Light: A poorly written spell from an adventure. I think you can close your eyes, move or 5’ step away then reopen them to avoid blindness, but maybe not. It’s unclear how long the blindness for passing through the wall lasts - maybe 1d4 rounds, maybe not. In any case flying, teleporting and maybe even jumping over a 10’ wall is very possible at this level and you can’t count on Wall of Light to do a lot.
* Wall of Thorns: A wall which you can pass through unhindered, with enough volume to fill some battlefields and control many others isn’t bad. I suspect it blocks line of sight or at least provides concealment (because I can’t see how this many thorns wouldn’t) but the description doesn’t mention it. In any case, moving through the wall or damaging it is slow enough that enemies more or less have to go around it or dispel it.  If your GM doesn’t say it blocks sight, just cast spells through the wall while it blocks movement through it to escape your damage over time hell.  This is what all walls should be.
	Buff
	* Aspect of the Wolf: In the wolf domain this is a 3rd level spell and it’s great at that level. In general use, you may not be excited about +4 enhancement bonuses to Str and Dex and a swift action trip all of which you can’t use in wild shape, at character level 9+.
* Blessing of the Salamander (Heal): An odd combination of buffs; fast healing, fire resistance and a bonus to CMD is going to be useful to someone (maybe a grappler who drags enemies through a wall of fire repeatedly) but seems oddly specific.  Note that unlike positive energy, fast healing works on any valid target, so everything but a golem with spell immunity or things immune to polymorphs (including undead or non-golem constructs) can be healed by this, and fast healing 5 is enough to not be crazy for out-of-combat healing if you need it to be fast.  If you want it for healing, use extend spell on it to get 100+ HP from it.
* ✰Fey Form II✰: Like Fey Form I this lets you fight without losing the use of your magic gear, now with more weird options and better numbers! Fastachees have 30’ reach while being size tiny, Ankous are still flying terrors if they’re actually druids (most of their attacks are secondary anyway, and their primary attacks are claws, so if you’re going to just use a scimitar, you’re not dropping your offensive power with the other natural attacks anyway), Nuckelavees are similar being horse-men with weapon attacks and secondary natural attacks, Whisperers are all-seeing ghostly tentacle monsters that are technically legally distinct from Slenderman.  Their six tentacles are reach 3d10 touch attacks, but don’t benefit from strength.
* Fickle Winds: Wind Wall without needing to worry about enemies getting past it, and being able to move around without losing the effect is pretty good. It’s possible your GM will read ‘cylinder’ as being a hollow cylinder and allow shooting straight down at you by enemies above; there are ways around it. If there were more ordinary archers shooting at you by the time you can cast 5th level spells it’d be better, but a lot of ranged effects at this level will be magic which Fickle Winds can’t stop.  If you are fighting ranged humanoid combatants regularly, your archer or gunslinger will love having immunity to return fire, and unlike Warp Wood, they can’t save against the wind.
* Hunters Blessing✰: Something very like the base level of favored enemy and favored terrain doesn’t sound like much but it’s a +2 sacred bonus to lots of things, lasting hours/level. Just pick your targets wisely. Commune With Birds to find out what you might find.  In a “themed” dungeon, like a castle of ice giants where nearly all encounters are the same thing, this is basically a party-wide day-long buff to most of what you’re doing in the day.  Sacred bonuses are pretty uncommon so it stacks with most things, and a ranger can also stack this with their own favored enemy so they don’t feel left out.
* Invoke Primal Power: You don’t usually want to start wild shape in combat, but if you do so this spell can give you some odd buffs if you cast it as a swift action as you wild shape (so quick wild shape won’t work with it, sadly). Trampling or tripping or some other things. IPP also gives Con and natural armor bonuses, which are less odd but still useful.
* Stoneskin: It burns money which rubs some the wrong way, but stoneskin has been a standard defensive buff for many editions. DR 10/adamantine for 10 minutes/level is enough to be noticeable, even if it won’t fully stop any attacks at this level.  The real reason to avoid this spell is druid gets it a spell level late, so try to get the wiz/sorc/arc to cast it instead of you if one’s around - you have plenty of other good buffs to give with your spell slots.
* Threefold Aspect: Bonuses that last longer than 24 hours are considered permanent, and this spell lasts 24 hours. If you use Extend Spell, you can get all the benefit of permanent bonuses to int and wis, including bonus skill ranks. If you cast it each day, you will have a “permanent” bonus from Threefold Aspect the next day. In addition to that, casting it on your animal companion can boost its int score by up to 4, which will pretty much settle all doubts about whether your animal companion is truly intelligent.
	Debuff
	* Baleful Polymorph: A save-or-suck which can be close to a save-or-die spell; losing your mind and body at the same time doesn’t leave much. It has plenty of weaknesses (it’s a single-target save negates with SR at SL 5, some enemies are immune to Fort save effects, others can shapeshift out of it, and close range isn’t good) but it is still a scary spell.  Possibly better for turning commoners that displease you into newts than as a combat spell.
* Pernicious Pranksters (Summons): Random effects aren’t good, and on top of that this spell has random targets. The CMB is acceptable at least. 
	Blast
	* Fire Snake: Something like a fireball with intensified spell and selective spell may sound alright, but in practice it’s underwhelming. Take Explosion of Rot instead.
* Whip of Centipedes (Summons): The first whip summons, Whip of Spiders isn’t bad but Whip of Centipedes hasn’t scaled up enough to justify the 3 extra spell levels. No one cares about DC 13 Fort saves at this level, or even about a 2d6 damage whip with no enhancement bonus.
* Wind Blades: In order to take as much damage from this spell as from a 1d6/level spell the target needs to move 85’+ at the lowest level you can cast it, which is unlikely considering it’s a touch range spell. If there’s serious wind in the area, possibly from a Control Winds spell you cast, this gets better but even 5d8/round from an actual tornado isn’t that much per round - the effects of the tornado will matter more. Slashing damage is subject to DR too. If you’re playing flyby attack tag you can use this, assuming you’re playing a sylph or have talked the GM into it but usually once you reach melee movement slows right down.  Oh, and it’s single-target touch save negates with SR, so even if this spell was amazing, the fact that it’s so likely to fail would make it dubious. Also, the spell description is wrong - Gust of Wind does last for a full round.  A lot of the problems with Paizo spells boil down to Paizo writers not knowing the rules they’re trying to modify…
	 Heal
	* Cure Critical Wounds: 27ish damage healed isn’t a good amount for a standard action in combat at this level either. Nothing much is until Heal arrives from this point.
	Summons
	* Insect Plague: Once a great if awkward spell in AD&D, but this version is terrible enough to never be worth casting - multiple swarms fixed in place just aren’t going to help ever.  Even if you could completely immobilize the target, you have much lower-level spells that do 2d6 damage per round.
* SNA V: The options for summons are opening up at this level. Besides the large elementals (which now have DR 5/-) there’s cyclops with their 1/day automatic roll of 20, dire lions for pouncing damage, manticores that are basically dire lions that trade pounce to fly and have a four ranged attacks so you can stop fliers, and ankylosaurs with their stunning tails. Those who gain access to non-standard summons can do weird stuff with remaceras, shambling mounds and more.
* Entice Fey: There’s a lot of fey with 12 HD or less. I’m sure you can find something effective to do with a nereid or shadow collector to do your bidding and PC buff spells on them, and there’ll be more I haven’t thought of. Expensive, and you’ll need to buff your own know (nature) or perform before casting, but effective if you do it right.
* Release the Hounds: A swarm of medium size animals with no resistances or immunities aside from partial swarm immunities is going to get cut to pieces by AoOs before it can do anything much.
* Snake Staff: Like the Giant Vermin spell, this creates a bunch of I-can’t-believe-they’re-not-summons which aren’t close to being level appropriate. Their attack bonuses are +5 or less. They’re not even useful roadblocks, enemies can ignore their AoOs.
	Utility
	* Air Walk Communal: If you can spare a 5th level spell slot more easily than multiple 4th level spell slots, this gets the party aloft.
* Control Winds: See the wind speed chart to see what this actually does. Cease all ranged weapon fire. Deny the enemy the skies. (Inflict a penalty of as much as -16 on fly checks, which you can then cast spells that require fly checks to keep flying, like Rope Tornado or Throw small creatures around. Cause huge amounts of property damage. Or, I suppose, you could stop this happening from some other magical or natural effect. Control Winds beats the 4th level wind spells quite handily if there’s any moving air to work with, and does so over a far larger area for a far longer duration.
* Hallow /  Unhallow: A very weird legacy spell with a ton of unique rules that make it hard to adjudicate - ask your GM how spells not normally used as an AoE work when put in a Hallow AoE.  Instantaneous means the area isn’t even considered “magic” and you can’t dispel it.  An Unhallow put on a Hallow doesn’t even dispel it, so the world is inevitably converging on 100% saturation of Hallow or Unhallow.  Pick a side, we’re at war! Protection from Good/Evil blocks out fiends or celestials, plus compulsion spells from good/evil creatures.  Hallow prevents creation of undead, but Unhallow doesn’t do anything to undead. Druids don’t get the channel bonus when they cast it, but you can still attach a spell for a year. You might be able to cast several of these if you UMD a scroll?  Most of the spells you can attach are for cleric, not druid.  Semi-permanent Dispel Magic that recasts it every time you enter the area can be a useful way to wipe off curses and other bad magic, while Dimensional Anchor can be useful for a trap where someone can teleport in, but not out.  Maybe?  Again, how this works is weird and needs GM arbitration.
* Sturdy Tree Fort: Paizo thought every wizard camping spell needed a druid equivalent.  Druids get to boast their version of Secure Shelter is a cool tree fort, no goblins allowed! As a camping spell, Sylvan Hideaway is all you need if you just don’t want an encounter, so this spell only makes sense if your GM says Sylvan Hideaway is too cramped to do downtime activities or you want to use this as a tree fort, and take advantage of improved cover during an ambush.  If treated as a no-save +8 AC buff, this is a potent combat spell if you have the minute to pre-cast it.
* Tree Stride: Limited teleport for druids and fey critters that get it as an SLA.  The Eurocentric writing only anticipates common European trees, and when this spell was written in AD&D, it came with options to customize druids to the specific environment not preserved in this spell, so talk to your GM if you want a tropical druid that focuses on baobab trees or something. Personal range means druids can’t share it with their party unless the druid goes first and the wizard just scrys on the druid.  Personal range does mean you can cast it on an animal companion, though.  It’s not nearly as good as Teleport at the level wizard is getting that, but you can have your animal companion hide inside a tree and suddenly jump out to snag someone, so that’s something.  Otherwise, sit tight and wait for Transport via Plants.
	Protection
	* Death Ward: This used to be 100% mandatory at all times back once you hit high levels in 3e, but now that most of the death effects were nerfed to not actually being instant death, it would have been less so even if this spell itself wasn’t nerfed from “immunity to instant death” to “+4 to saves against death-flavored blasting spells”, which is much less exciting.  At least it actually grants you immunity to level drain that otherwise has no save (for the initial damage) from creatures like spectres.  It’s also immunity to antipaladins that focus on touch of corruption nonsense.  You only pull this out when you’re expecting undead or divine casters like that now.  The cleric and some other casters like witch gets it lower level, so if you have one in the party, try to get them to cast this one.
* Die for Your Master (Beastmaster): An upgraded version of Bleed for Your Master for the exceptionally callous druid, packmaster druid, or possibly a BBEG druid.  This spell forces an animal companion to do a Secret Service dive to protect the caster.
	Beastmaster
	* Animal Growth: Druids who aren’t using other polymorphs like Fae Form on their animal companions will have been waiting so, so long for this spell.  +8 strength is at least as much as some of the best polymorphs, and will add a lot of damage, as will the functional “Enlarge Animal” aspect of this spell.  It’s not specifically targeting your animal companion, so you can cast this on your Awakened animal friend, or any other friendly animal to try to keep them relevant, although even dinosaurs are going to have trouble surviving helping you in combat at this level. 
* Awaken: Give an animal human-level intelligence and potentially give it class levels and a reason to work with you.  Instant ally NPC, just add 2,000 gp of herbs and oils!  It’s hypothetically power beyond what’s on your character sheet.  There’s a lot you can do with this spell, and the fact that the spell assumes an animal or tree will be friendly and enjoy being human-smart, rather than lonely or weirded out.  A lot of the implications of this spell are RP-dependent, and there’s a whole section of a Pathfinder Companion guiding how to RP different animals but you could easily use a spell like this to create some powerful allied NPCs that you can leave behind to assist you or defend your home.  Note that GMs may say that powerful NPCs like awakened creatures gain a share of the XP if they assist in battle. Depending on how your GM treats this, it is either a waste or amazing.
* Companion Transportation: This can be great if you can get your animal companion immune to staggered somehow (or have a wizard’s familiar to UMD Remove Paralysis before the companion’s turn).  A feyspeaker or other relatively fragile druid can simply swap places with their animal companion when in trouble.  You might also use this to get your animal companion in somewhere they can’t go, whether socially or physically, but Carry Companion can handle that in most cases.  There are few places a druid with wildshape can’t reach an animal companion can, but some archetypes give up wildshape.
* Master’s Mutation: Summons die too fast to worry about spending actions buffing them too heavily.  At the level you get this, just spend the slot summoning more monsters, not improving existing ones.  Using this on an Altered Summon Monster is not appealing either because of the rounds/level duration.  It can be situationally useful, like adding constrict and rake to a summon that already landed a grapple, so you know it will get some use from it, or if enemy spellcasters make your summons suddenly need to fly, but this is a high-level spell slot to spend on situational uses.
	Information
	* Replay Tracks (situational): CSI: Pathfinder spell gives you a blurry CGI replay of what happened wherever there are tracks, extrapolating more information than you could possibly gain from tracks naturally, and letting you reconstruct crime scenes.  Personal range means you can technically get your companion to do this if they sunk all their skill points into survival and you didn’t, but you’ll need a means for them to communicate what they find.  You get this at twice the level of hunters, so maybe keep it as a hunter scroll?
* Jungle Mind: This spell is misleadingly named.  This spell is actually an animal radar, where you learn about general animal population, then select one vaguely-defined “type” of animals to track, and know where every single one within a mile is currently located, and you even get a relationship bonus with them.  Use this with wild empathy and possibly Alpha Instinct to assemble an army of animals like dinosaurs to stampede  when you need to really cause chaos.
* Commune With Nature: Gain knowledge about the area within a mile radius.  You will notice most of what you can gain knowledge about, like animal populations or presence of dangerous predators, are things birds would know about.  Even if you get three questions, this spell is SL 5, and Commune With Birds is SL 1.  Commune With Birds is amazing.  Still, for the few things birds can’t help you with, like if you’re in an underground area, or looking for specific people or trying to find minerals, this spell is a no-save method of gaining a wide array of knowledge.
