# 7th Level Spells

7th Level Spells
	Control
	* Scouring Winds: This combines effects of a few lower-level spells. Blind enemies like Ash Storm from SL 3, it causes windstorm winds like Control Wind (although this negates your own side’s ranged attacks), and does 3d6 no-save piercing damage per round.  The thing is, 3d6 isn’t very much damage at level 13+ (and increasingly common DR may negate it), and it lacks the movement-negating abilities of other spells.  (Presumably because you can move it 30 feet as a move action, but you’re being given a lot of spells that take a move action by now.)  The windstorm does at least penalize fly checks, so you might try a spell like Rope Tornado to try to shoot down some fliers into your quagmire of DoT control spells.  Otherwise, you’re probably better off with a dazing version of a lower-level spell for the kind of spell level we’re reaching.
	Buff
	* Form of the Exotic Dragon I: Form of the Exotic Dragon gets good, but you don’t want this version, whose effects are just worse than your wild shape or Fae Form options at this level.  Druids get this a spell level later than wizards, and it’s terrible for them at the level, too!
* Legendary Proportions: If you just want an improved version of Enlarge Person for someone you can’t give polymorphs to, or who doesn’t want to change shape, this is a decent option, but it may not be competitive for a SL 7 slot.  The stat bonuses aren’t fantastic compared to what other polymorphs can give, but it essentially rolls Stoneskin and a decent amount of natural armor in with the improved Enlarge Person, and 200 gp material cost is relative pennies at this level.  It’s best used if you have a target that absolutely doesn’t want to polymorph, like your fighter ally who’s built around their specific weapon, or if you have a large animal companion like a tiger that loses too much if you polymorph them.
	Debuff
	* Baleful Shadow Transmutation: This is an SL 7 single target spell with will negates and SR:yes.  (It has a fort save, but that only applies if someone else tries to polymorph them again, and you should absolutely kill the target before that might happen.)  A spell this likely to fail had better do something amazing if it succeeds, and… well, this spell can be amazing.  Make the target think they’re a puppy, and they’ll wag their tail and try to play fetch for you.  Also, they’ll somehow forget what they are so hard they physically lose things like immunities, regeneration, and immortality.  This is technically a way to permanently kill the Tarrasque or Cthulhu, as in spite of the name, it’s only a [shadow] illusion spell, not transmutation, a polymorph, or even [mind-affecting], so the Tarrasque and Cthulhu are not immune to it.  I’m not sure anything is.  Someone at Paizo screwed up. This spell bypasses all the guardrails that normally protect end boss creatures. It’s risky and complete overkill on anything that isn’t otherwise nearly impossible to kill, but if you have to kill a god, this is a will save away from making them just some guy who thinks they’re a puppy and eminently stabbable.
	Blast
	* Fire Storm: It’s yet another fire-based CLd6 spell, but this one has extremely selective targeting.  You get to control whether or not you burn plants, and get two cubes of effect per level to target directly on the enemy. (Why do druids get so many plant-burning wildfire spells, anyway?  You’d think they’d have more lightning that goes around trees or something…)  Just keep in mind that SL 7 is a high level for a blast, and you could use this spell slot for a maximized Explosion of Rot to do up to 90 untyped damage, so you should only use this spell when you really need its ability to blast many, many things at once with precision rather than just “a blast spell”.
* Sunbeam: Brings vampires Final Death.  This spell is not worth the actions if you aren’t using it on something like a vampire that is weak to daylight and undead, but hey, you can vaporize a vampire, dread wraith, or banshee per round. Cathartic after how traumatizing incorporeals can be at lower levels.
* Morning Sun: I suppose if you’re fighting an entire horde of light-vulnerable undead like wraiths and spectres at the same time, this is better than Sunbeam, but… if this is happening, your GM hates you or only added that encounter because you memorized this spell, because that would be a TPK in most cases otherwise.  Otherwise, this is just a stupidly-expensive lamp.
	Heal
	* Cure Moderate Wounds, Mass: Oh boy!  I get to spend a spell slot and action that should win fights in one round healing about 1/4th the damage a single typical monster does per round!  Mass cure spells have always been astonishingly worthless.
* Heal: Finally, it’s the good HP-restoring spell.  It can actually outpace damage in (although you’re going to burn spell slots fast if you try), and more importantly, it can clear a huge swathe of negative conditions and ability damage all at once.  It can also blast an undead for pretty considerable damage.  Druids just feel bad because they get it a spell late like all the other spells everyone else gets.
	Summons
	* Changestaff: You can create a treant and… wait… isn’t that what Liveoak did last level?  And that was good because it lasted days/level while this lasts hours/level and can’t control more trees.  The only reason to pick this over Liveoak at all is that you aren’t capped at one at a time.  Technically, you might be able to flood the area with treants you summon ahead of time, but SL 7 is an expensive level to spam your spell slots before battle for disposable meat walls.
* Creeping Doom: 4d6 damage is better than Swarm Skin last level, but HP is advancing, too, and this just isn’t enough.  (Burning Entanglement could do 4d6 damage a round to creatures that failed its save at half this level.) You also have to concentrate to move the swarms, which only move at 30 feet a round (but technically, you can double move them, and RAW, swarms do damage at the end of each move action, although most GMs ban that.)  Hypothetically, casters can fail the save and be distracted, but the concentration check DC doesn’t scale as fast as concentration bonus does. The best thing to say about this is just that it’s four blobs of 60 HP you summon with a standard action, and if enemies try to kill them, they’re wasting actions, but just summoning HP with a 1 round cast time and not using standard actions to control them seems like a better plan to me.
* Elemental Bombardment: This one allows you to hilariously use your earth elementals as pseudo-meteors.  Don’t be fooled by all the extra rules about fall damage, this spell is still (summoning), all your summoning feats still apply, they still get to act immediately after being dropped on your enemies, and they’re even the same sizes of elementals you’d get from SNA VII! If you have superior summons, you can summon 3 huge earth elementals while doing 12d6 damage with each one and then they get to take their turn and be a normal elemental, although they do start prone.  They stop you from slamming the elementals into more than one target each, but they don’t say anything about slamming all your elementals into the same target, especially if they’re bigger than medium, and each elemental takes a corner for a no-save, SR: no 36d6 (~126 damage) plus surrounding the target with summons who still get to act immediately.  If you go smaller, you even get more elementals than you’d otherwise get with one SNA spell.  If you have a greater rod of giant summons, you can summon 5 giant large elementals that are now huge, so they fall on people for 12d6, too.  (~210 damage if you can manage to drop them all on the same target.) Decide whether it’s worth standing and losing a full attack and provoking an AoO or just flailing while prone at the enemy with a -4 to attack.  They do have half the duration, but if it’s a combat summon, so what?  Do you expect this combat to last more than 6 rounds, anyway?!  Only the fact that this is a round-long cast and there are standard option casts keep this spell from being an all-star.
* SNA VII: Greater elementals come online now, giving DR 10/- and triple-digit HP, letting them really soak damage.  Gargantuan animals like tyrannosaurs and dire crocodiles are now in play, able to swallow enemies whole to just wipe them from the board. Brachiosaurus can literally walk all over the enemy with greater overrun with trample.  For raw damage, however, consider just flooding the room with dire tigers.
* Summon Giant Ally II: Frost and fire giant are already on SNA, but hey, standard action summons!  Greater ice and fire elementals will outcompete them in raw stats, but you might not be able to fit huge combatants in the dungeon, and hey, now they’re standard action summons!  Getting 1d3+1 giants if you have superior summons makes this much more attractive.  The lack of “summoning sickness” in Pathfinder means that your summons can full attack as soon as they appear, so surround an enemy with stone giants before they can react.
	Utility
	* Plundered Power: You really have to go shopping for an ability worth using this on.  The obvious option of sacrificing an efreeti for Wish is barred by the material component limit, and the summon universal monster rule most fiends have isn’t duplicating a spell. “Altered” spell-like abilities includes things like maximized SLAs, which can be fairly useful.  The best bid here is to go for spells not on spell lists your party otherwise has.  For example, if you somehow subdue a balor, you can get Dominate Monster or Implode early.  If your party can actually restrain itself to non-lethal damage, you can potentially take a target down non-lethally, and this spell can be kept as a scroll for when you come across a chance to use it.  I recommend extend spell being put on it to maximize the value.  It’s just that you’re really unlikely to be able to choose good times to use this spell, so it’s a big gamble that will very likely not pay off.  But then, it’s just a game, and unlikely events make great stories!  Also, it’s [evil] if you follow a good deity.
* Control Weather: Control Winds is three spell levels lower, and this takes 10 minutes to cast, so you’re not doing this in combat, although you may be doing quite a bit of harm.  You can use this spell to create wide-scale devastation on the scale of a chunk of a city by summoning tornadoes or a small hurricane, and that’s definitely what people focus on, but it’s probably more often used in the background (both in-universe and by players) during downtime days just canceling out bad weather (if your GM remembers weather exists outside spells) so your herb gardens can get ideal sun and rain.
* Wind Walk: Try not to confuse this for Air Walk.  This is a mass flying spell that gives you car-like speeds for a “sky road trip”. At the level a druid gets it (an SL later than clerics), provided your GM says being flown by the wind doesn’t fatigue and you can travel for more than 8 hours a day, you can take up to four other characters with you (plus Carry Companion) up to 780 miles or 65 hexes in a hex crawl map in a day, which is usually larger than most maps.  Only its very high level, and the fact that you just got Transport via Plants last level dulls that.  I guess if you need to go to the middle of a desert, you could cast Transport via Plants, then this to get where you need to go
	Information
	* True Seeing: This is a very powerful spell, which is why you will bitterly complain about clerics getting it four levels before you do.  Illusions are very powerful spells in the right circumstances, but “when someone cast True Seeing” is absolutely the wrong circumstance.  Also, this spell lets people see your true form while you are wild shaped, which might be exceptionally freaky if you’re polymorphed into a tiny form contorted in a way that a human doesn’t normally bend, like a coiled snake.
* Tectonic Communion: It’s “Commune With Continent”. You have a void of knowledge where “civilization” exists, but otherwise, you’re asking questions about an area of at a minimum a 2,600 mile diameter, which is nearly enough to cover the entire continental United States. Get an instant census of the entire wild animal population on a continental scale.  The way that cities are “dark blots on your awareness” implies you are aware of everything else, not just getting responses from some entity, which should be the amount of knowledge that fries a mortal brain.  Map out the entire Darklands cave system barring cities.  Instantly know where every logging camp on the continent is, and who is hurting the trees.  Find every deposit of precious minerals on the continent, and go mining for spell components like diamonds.  Instantly know about any person you can ask a question about who isn’t in “civilization”, and get the knowledge to Scry on them for more.  At level 20, with a greater rod of widen spell, a 4,000 mile radius lets you ask how the planet’s core is feeling, or if you somehow can cast this spell in the center of the core without dying, the entire planet is in the spell’s radius.  (Presuming an Earth-sized planet.)  Also, Commune with Nature doesn’t say anything about space stopping it, so you can use this to check for the location of any satellites in orbit on your half of the planet if cast from the surface (although manufactured ones are just “dark blots”)..  This spell is bordering on Omniscience, and it’s really only limited by what your GM is willing to let you get away with, as how specific a question you’re allowed to ask (as in, asking for details about people meeting specific criteria or trying to find a specific person somewhere in the current radius not in civilization) isn’t clearly defined.
* Scrying, Greater: Scrying without the hassles of a long casting time and with a duration long enough to do some serious snooping. If you want to wait until the BBEG hits the toilet before you drop in and ruin their day that’s doable, providing they don’t notice the scrying sensor.  (Although unless he poos in the woods or likes very big potted plants, this may be something to ask a character with an actual Teleport spell to do, instead, as Teleport Via Plants is otherwise not a great ambush spell.)
