# 1st Level Spells

1st Level Spells
	Control
	* Burning Sands: SR/No, Save/No difficult terrain that hurts you. What's not to love?  This is the best SL1 dazing spell candidate, as even 1 damage can trigger the metamagic’s daze effect.
* ✰Entangle✰: INSANE RADIUS spell with difficult terrain, and entangle debuff at level one. This is your GO TO control spell and will be for many levels to come, even as you get evolved versions of Entangle that do even crazier things.  It requires “plants” in the area to work, although in Pathfinder, fungi and mold count as plants, so you can argue it works in natural caverns, maybe?  Remember that entangling stops all movement if the entangling item is rooted to the ground… like most plants.  That said, you might be able to cheese plant availability by bringing your own potted berry plants or evergreen seeds and having the rogue throw them at the enemy before casting this spell in barren landscapes or paved roads.  Oh, and it’s not 40’ radius on the ground, just “plants in a 40-foot-radius,” meaning that if you’re in a forest, the trees can be difficult terrain for fliers up to the height of the treetops or edge of the spell’s radius.
* Expeditious Construction (utility): Quickly lock down a hallway with insta lego powers. Remember, whatever you make is real and permanent because it's an instant creation spell. Very nice, very versatile.
* Expeditions Excavation (utility): While this spell’s utility powers are rivaled by a mundane shovel, as a combat spell, this spell has easily overlooked features.  First, the movement on a successful reflex save is specifically mentioned not to trigger an AoO… but the falling on a failed reflex save does not have that distinction. Second, uncontrolled falling causes a creature to land prone, and unlike Create Pit spells, the creature here is still only 5 feet down, so they are prone while within melee reach of anyone in an adjacent square, giving a +4 to attack rolls made by adjacent characters.  Standing up from prone also provokes another AoO and takes a move action.  Third, they are now on an elevation below the surrounding terrain, so allies now gain a +1 to attack for having the high ground (for a total of +5 against a prone foe). Fourth, trying to climb out of a pit requires both hands be free and any shield to be stowed (so no shield AC and disarmed) with the character losing dex to AC while climbing (meaning a rogue that readies an attack against the target climbing gets a sneak attack).  This is a lesser Grease type of effect, but it can still be worth using against medium or smaller enemies at low levels.  You generally don’t want to use this spell to create concealment (which prevents AoOs) when trying to trip an enemy, but it also works to just dig a hole next to your buddy to create instant concealment if you need a distraction.
* Obscuring Mist✰: Toss down a smoke bomb to escape with style like Batman.  Combine with ashen path to make your enemies blind and your allies unstoppable. Alternatively, just fuck over anyone doing things from long range.  Be aware that, unlike Fog Cloud, this spell also has a vulnerability to spells like Fireball.
	Buff
	* Aspect of the Falcon: Okay the bonuses might seem small, but there aren’t a lotta ways to boost your crit multiplier, and it lasts for minutes per level. If we are an archer, we need every bonus we can get!!!! 
* ✰Blend✰: Hide in plain sight, but you have to move slowly. The main benefit? You only break stealth if you attack! Not if you cast spells!!! Woot! Enjoy casting all your wack bullshit and not getting caught. This alone makes it worth putting points into stealth to become untargetable.  Wildshaping into smaller animals grants a massive stealth bonus, with tiny creatures getting a +8 bonus to stealth - turn into a ninja rabbit (for ground speed), monkey (for climb), archaeopteryx (the only flier whose base speed matches fly speed unless your GM lets you get away with a hawk flying 30 feet/round), meerkat (to burrow your way to the enemy),  king crab (to swim), or velociraptor (if you don’t have Beast Shape II forms from wild shape yet so you need a fast small form), and snoop or fly into the middle of a crowd of enemies and change into a combat form in the surprise round to give them a hello from melee range. Win initiative with Heightened Awareness, and you can start combat with a full attack on a flat-footed enemy.  As a personal spell, you can also cast it on your animal companion.
* Blend With Surroundings: Blend, but you can cast it on the rest of the party, and they have to stand still for it to work.  You can’t aggressively go hunting, but if you’re setting up an ambush, the entire party can look like random shrubs if you’re using spells like Mirage, or just look like random coat racks and chairs if you’re hiding in a house to stage a surprise party, I guess.
* Cheetah Sprint: Swift action ZOOOOMMMMM. Great for later game forms or if you want to get in/out of combat as fast as possible. Seriously, moving 300 feet in a single round is terrifying.
* Face of the Devourer: An extra primary natural attack that doesn’t require anything more than a SL 1 is pretty good, even if bites are relatively common.  Animal companions and martial PCs alike won’t say no to extra attacks and damage, and this can benefit from their natural strength scores to add notable damage.  Anyone going for an intimidation build will enjoy a +4 buff from the Halloween mask effect, too.  Well, it does come from Rovagug, but in custom settings, it’s worth asking your GM if it can be repurposed in their campaign.  Just note that it’s a polymorph, so when you’re at the level you can just Fey Form your animal companion, that’s nearly always better.
* Feather Step: Hey you know how you are constantly making difficult terrain, such as with Entangle or Stone Call? Make that everyone else's problem! MWAHAHAHAHA evil!
* ✰Frostbite✰ (Blast/Debuff): It ain’t just for magi!  Some might laugh at “just” 1d6+CL damage, but did you know that you can use natural attacks to deliver touch spells?  (CRB p.183, under “touch spells in combat - holding the charge”.)  You can’t do the “free action delivery” for casting on your round and use the natural attack, but instantaneous touch spells last until you discharge them or cast another spell, so you can just cast Frostbite before battle, be in bear form, and now you can put the “bite” in “Frostbite!”  Add 1d6 + your level nonlethal cold damage on top of your natural attacks, no action required.  (Depending on reading, the spell may only be “held” in one natural attack, and it’s possible to accidentally discharge on other objects if you, say, put the spell on your claws and tap the ground with the claws while walking.)  Oh, and you can put this in a spell storing weapon so your friends can get in on this.  Oh, AND it can inflict fatigue too.  Nonlethal damage is as good as normal damage in most cases besides undead and constructs, and if need be, get a lesser elemental rod for acid or fire or the like.  Once you’re at mid-levels, any wild shaping gish druid should have this spell going basically any time you expect enemies that aren’t immune.  This is what you stockpile Pearls of Power 1 for!  Or don’t leave it a SL 1 spell, and put metamagic on it, like rime spell to inflict entangle with your bite!  Sickening spell and frightening spell work, too, but you can get cherry blossom spell for more consistent ability score damage than most spells actually meant for such things, or add in dazing to make a stunlock build for your druid!  Seriously consider magical lineage for this spell if you’re planning on being a polymorph brawler.
* ✰Heightened Awareness✰ (Utility/Information): A perfect target for pearls of power 1 or simply a scroll or wand, this spell can increase perception (so you spot battles coming, don’t get ambushed and let the enemy goes first) and then be dismissed for +4 initiative so you are more likely to go first.  You are a full caster.  If you go first and prevent the enemy from being able to act with your control spells, you can win battles without even taking damage!  Cast this spell and use it for the initiative bonus every battle! If you don’t have enough pearls, take it as a wand, and share it with UMD.  It’s personal, so give it to your animal companion, too. +4 initiative is absolutely worth 15 gp per character per battle.  
* Longstrider: Have a higher base speed for hours per level! This may seem like a small thing, but that 10 feet will matter, and likely when you are most annoyed by it.  As a “target: you” personal spell, your animal companion can benefit with share spells if they need a speed boost to reach the enemies.
* Shillelagh: Wanna melee? CONGRATS, your club is now a greatsword and a magic one at that! Considering that there aren’t a lot of ways to get magic weapons, especially this early on, this can be a serious boon, especially from levels 1-3, where that 1 extra point of accuracy is the difference between you and the fighter.  But you start with scimitar proficiency, whose 18-20/x2 crit spread is better than a 1d8 weapon, anyway, and when you start enhancing them, they leave this spell in this dust.  You should really not use this past level 2.
	Debuff
	* Faerie Fire: Okay this may not look like much but its anti blur/displacement AND invisibility with NO save. That shit will save your life one day, if not make a lot of fights WAY easier.  Keep scrolls to have it handy, as you likely won’t know ahead of time when you’ll need it.  25 gp to negate a possible nightmare encounter where you have to constantly toss chalk dust around trying to find the enemy is worth it.
* Mudball: Depending on the GM reading, this spell seems intended to not offer a save until the creature’s next turn, being a single-target ranged touch attack SR:no that causes blindness that only grants the reflex save on the creature’s turn.  Remember that a blinded creature cannot AoO, treats all creatures as though they are invisible, and the rogue gets to sneak attack them.Ranged touch attacks are usually pretty easy to make, so this can be worth your action, setting up an easy takedown.  It’s not as good if the GM declares the ref save applies at the same time as your touch attack, as well, because the functional no-save initial effect is really key in such an otherwise marginal effect.
* Touch of Bloodletting: Single-target will save negates with SR:yes should take an enemy out of the fight.  Bleed is utterly worthless in combat because of the shortness of battles, so you’re doing this for a -3 to attack, damage, and AC, plus removing charges, which is inconvenient, but not taking them out of the fight.
	Blast
	* Snowball: No save, SR:no basic ranged touch attack. With intensify spell, it even scales a little bit. Better on magi, but you can still use it.  At low levels, this is often enough to delete an enemy outright.  If your GM says the original version of the spell from People of the North is still valid, this is purple for also adding on a round of staggered to your damage.  Due to the lack of save, a wand of Snowball up-leveled to CL 5 only costs 3,500 gp, and can serve as an emergency “ranged weapon” for druids with no other options when their spells run out.
	 Heal
	* Cure Light Wounds: It’s a baby heal, but it’s a classic for a reason.  Keep this as a wand so you can keep casting it as much as is needed, but keep in mind that Infernal Healing can be a more affordable option, and boots of the earth is basically a permanent healing solution 
* Remove Sickness: Okay so you don’t actually want to memorize this spell… but there are precious few ways to remove nauseated, and this is one of them.  Keep scrolls of this spell at all times.
	Summons
	* Summon Minor Ally: Summon a bunch of tiny but dangerous animals. Not to be underestimated!!!! At higher levels, they don’t even qualify as combatants, but they still occupy space, block charges, and require actions to (ludicrously over)kill, so they can still possibly justify the round to summon them in actions the enemy takes going around them.
* Summon Nature’s Ally I: Okay so! The baseline druid (And many of its good archetypes) keep summon nature’s ally and can turn ANY spell into SNA. This is important, because for those  druids, you should never prepare the spell…because you basically always have it prepared!!!! All future reviews will be assuming you do not have spontaneous SNA.  At low levels, consider Summon Minor Ally.  At higher levels, these summons are so pathetically weak they won’t slow the enemy down enough to justify the casting time unless spammed in bulk… and Summon Minor Ally exists because this spell can’t.
	Utility
	* Air Bubble: Water breathing on the cheap! Keep a scroll as an emergency “life preserver”.
* Ant Haul: Improved carrying capacity! Look you don’t always need it but when you need it, you REALLY need it. Cast it on the stong person to make them ridiculous.  Alternately, cast it on a pack mule to have them carry enough to fill a semi truck.
* Brightest Night: This spell doubles the vision range of most characters in dark areas, where you need to rely on torches or Light spells. Even if they already have low-light vision, it’s now twice as good.  Possibly worth taking as a wand if you’re going to be in dark dungeons all the time and your GM uses the light rules as written.
* Deadeye’s Lore: As a druid, some of the big things you’ll be asked to do is feed the party, keep it from getting lost on long overland journeys, and occasionally track down monsters in the wilderness.  This spell directly improves all those things.  If your GM disallows potted berry plants and demands you find new berries to turn into Goodberries every day, this is a good way to do that at little cost.
* Goodberry: This is your primary food spell, and essentially is a level one spell to negate the entire concept of survival gameplay.  Note that the berries are not components, but targets of the spell, so a component pouch or eschew materials does not help here.  Bring your own potted berry plant (several if you throw them for Entangle, too) and you can pick some berries as you need them.  Note that this spell does not care what kind of berry you cast it on - poisonous, underripe, overripe, inedible - just that it is “fresh”, which is vague, but where the description text indicates that means “has just been picked”.  No matter what it used to be, it is transmuted to being nutritious now, so have some nice fresh holly berries!  (No word on the taste, though…)  You can probably easily use these as bargaining chips for herbivorous animals you want to wild empathy with, as well.  It also technically heals, but the cap of 8 HP makes it basically pointless for healing past level 1 even before you consider the logistical hurdle of feeding even mid-level parties the thousands of berries they’ll need to heal.
* Ironbloom Sprouts: Goodberry for Darklands campaigns.  The 1 gp material component is annoying, but the Darklands can be harsher about forageable food and travel times, and these can be lighter and cheaper than normal rations if you use the doubled 2d4 version that doesn’t heal.  Like with Goodberry, it overwrites what kind of mushroom it is, so you can now eat poisonous ‘shrooms, and there’s no requirement of freshness, so you can eat dehydrated shrooms.  Eschew materials allows you to negate the 1 gp material component cost, but don’t get that feat just for this spell.
* Lucky Number: Have a reroll spell! Totally worth just burning a spell slot on it so everyone gets a random advantage token. GREAT buff to just keep on hand at later levels.
* Monkey Fish: Emergency mobility spell.  If you remembered to put at least one rank into swim and climb, this shouldn’t be a big deal for you, but your animal companion very likely can’t swim or climb, and you might want them to start doing so at some point, especially before you have Carry Companion always on tap.  Remind the limp-wristed wizards to take a scroll of this, as well, because they’re always failing climb checks or drowning without some help, but it’s personal-range, so they need to read the scroll before they jump in the water…
* Nature’s Paths: In a hex-grid campaign, this negates the penalties to moving on unpaved wilderness, being just another way druids dominate low-level overland travel before teleports run the show.  If overland travel times matter at all, counting as on a road doubles your speed through forests, for example, at the cost of a level 1 spell every day.
* Pass Without Trace✰: This spell serves two purposes.  One, it makes the rogue or other stealth-users negate the advantage of scent, which can otherwise immediately spot even invisible creatures.  Don’t overlook the power of scent!  The other is it prevents creatures from tracking you back to your camp.  There are often times you hit a dungeon, can’t beat it in one go, and need to retreat to camp and refresh your spells.  If the monsters there are intelligent creatures like hobgoblins that will hunt you down for revenge.  Using this spell is a way to throw revenge parties off from a night-time ambush.  Time when you cast it for after you started down a wrong trail leading to something more dangerous before doubling back for extra fun for any pursuers.  This can also be a spell to “lower the encounter rate” during overland travel depending on how the GM rationalizes such things.  The value of this spell varies heavily by how your GM plays, from an OK spell to nigh-mandatory.
* Restore Corpse: Normally useless to druids, this spell is intended just to allow you turn skeletons into zombies.  In order to ensure that you don’t use this just as an infinite meat exploit, Paizo included a line about how the meat is “slightly rotted” so it was inedible… wait… rotted?  Doesn’t Purify Food and Drink remove all rot?  Looks like meat is back on the menu, boys!  Go to a butcher, buy a whole pig skeleton, then Restore Corpse, pull the muscles and organs out, Purify Food and Drink, rinse and repeat. (You’re sadly limited to medium creatures, so no feasting on endless blue whales.) Goodberry can already provide all the food you’ll probably need without a stupid exploit like this, but as a druid, you occasionally need to bargain with animals.  In particular, the only creatures really worth convincing to help you out are apex predators.  They aren’t interested in gold or Goodberries, but they might do what you want for a big stack of fresh pork chops, extra rare the way they like it!  A good number for how much meat and organs a pig can yield is about 150 lbs, with the skeleton you need to carry around weighing around 30 lbs (and another 20 lbs of skin and other tissue).  You can easily feed even a huge animal (like a polar bear or dire tiger) with this amount of meat, or several large animals (like lions or regular tigers) with one pig’s meat.  (And that’s using realistic proportions of meat, without getting into the stupidity of the “huge creature counts as two large creatures” meaning that a colossal creature like the Godzilla knockoff only eats 16 times what a human eats, and a human only needs 1 lb of food…)
* Shield Speech: Good for social encounters! It’s a stripped-down Silent Table.  You can keep your treason to the Thrice-Damned House of Thune from being revealed by casual conversation, at least. Whether this can disguise verbal spell components or not is questionable (so ask your GM) since you’re not speaking to someone else, but it becomes a better spell if you can use it to cast spells in social situations without it being immediately obvious you were the one to cast it.  Note that you have to be the one to do the talking with this spell, so don’t cast it if the bard is the face, and you’re trying to get an NPC to talk in confidence.
* Spirit Share (situational): So in general, this is mid…UNLESS you are an herbalist druid and want to use your turn passing out rad buffs that you normally could only cast on yourself, so that your teammates can take their turns. Or cast it on your familiars/animal companions and have them do it! Without having to waste actions searching around in bags! YAY ACTION ECONOMY!
* Touch of the Sea: Swim speed on the cheap.  You might want to scroll it along with Air Bubble for low-cost emergency swimming abilities.
	Protection
	* Endure Elements: Not always necessary but when it is, you'll love that you have access to it.
* Ice Armor: Druids mage armor! Gives you the same defenses as breastplate without having to worry about that pesky metal problem.
* Liberating Command✰: Immediate action, verbal only escape artist check, which can be used when a friend is in the jaws of a beast and about to be swallowed whole, or just being pinned by Black Tentacles.  Skip it at low levels, but come high levels, where there are tons of creatures that will be swallowing you whole without it, this spell is 100% mandatory at all times!! The victim has to make a concentration check to cast even an immediate action, no-somatic spell while grappled, so you want to have someone else cast the spell on the victim. It should be memorized by more than one caster - give the martials scrolls to UMD if you need to, everyone has to have the ability to cast Liberating Command, because it’s basically the only thing standing between you and the game becoming a vore fetish.  Don’t skimp on ranks in escape artist, either.
* Stone Shield: Immediate action earth bending is far more useful than you think! If you play 5e, this is their version of Shield, for +4 AC.
* Windy Escape: Immediate action crit negation WILL SAVE YOUR ASS and early on, dr10/magic will be hard as nails to pierce.
	Beastmaster
	* Acid Maw: Adding 1d4 acid damage isn’t huge, but SL1 slots aren’t in high demand at higher levels, and this is damage you can reliably add to the total that isn’t likely to be overlapped the way Magic Fang will be.
* Call Animal (Summons): You are literally full of spells that make animals bow to your will and become your helpful servants. All you need is some servants to command! OH LOOK! A CALL BUTTON! WHAT FORTUNE.
* Charm Animal: No, really, we’re friends now!  This is only single-target, but dinosaurs and dire animals can go up as high as CR 12, and even high-level ones have poor saves and poor Cha.  Some animals may be too ornery or hungry to listen to Wild Empathy alone, and this is an alternate option for speed-friendship.  Remember, charm isn’t enough to get a creature to willingly die for you, but they might let you walk through their turf unmolested or convince them someone else is encroaching on their territory, and you’ll “help them defend their territory”, making the odds seem better to an animal than they actually are...
* Enlarge Tail: Personal and technically made for kobolds, but not marked as such, so you can share spells with your animal companion.  A diplodocus with two tail attacks loves getting hours-long reach, attack, and damage bonuses for just an SL 1.
* Magic Fang: Make your beasts hurt more! We’ll get a better version later, but for now, this’ll do fine.
* Shield Companion: If you are a casting druid, your animal companion probably has some hit points to spare!!! Use them!
	Information
	* ✰Commune with Birds✰: Birds give you the lowdown based on the surrounding area up to a mile away.  They have a literal birds’ eye view and even if they don’t understand humanoid concerns, they can spot every large, dangerous creature (like humanoids) in the area.  You can easily use this to spot encounters coming, find fleeing enemies, or find safe camping spots. Pro Tip: Talk to the ravens. They know shit.
* Detect Plants and Animals: Okay I know this is silly but sometimes you need to look for something specific and this gives you a huge range for finding plants and animals, which are useful for your unique abilities.  Ask your GM if casting this can help you find specific rare, valuable herbs.
* Detect Aberration: You generally don’t need to worry about spells like this, but if there’s an Intellect Devourer on the loose playing a game of Among Us in your campaign, this is faster than a blood test for rooting out the headcrab zombies.  (And make sure they remove any lead-lined hats they may be wearing.  I have been informed that it is, in fact, not a halfling custom to carry thin sheets of lead everywhere.)  It has the same range as Detect Plants and Animals, but aberrations are going to be inherently hostile around 90% of the time, so if you suspect any may be in the bushes, but not behind 3 whole feet of trees, it’s worth rooting them out, and this can reveal shapeshifter types fairly easily.
* Read Weather: Level 1 druids are more effective than modern meteorologists… Most GMs forget about actually modeling the weather, but if you have one who remembers weather exists, this spell is one you should cast daily if you can find any way to fit it in.  Weather effects can have a huge impact on your campaign, and you need to know whether to pack an Endure Elements tomorrow morning.  Also, if you see a tornado and didn’t predict it, that lets you know it’s one caused by magic, and thus, likely another druid.
* Tears to Wine (Buff): Incredible buff to your ability to know things, which is very very useful. Moreover, you don’t have a lot of things that make you good at knowing things, so this is super useful.
* Whispering Lore (buff): Bonus to knowledge based on environment! Knowing things continues to be useful!
	

________________
