# Class Overview & Chassis

Class Overview
The Embodiment of Nature’s will. Guardians of the forest. Children of the elements. Druids have lots and lots of lore, but at their core, they are often forces of nature, aspects of the beast and masters of the world. A lot of traits that we now ascribe to wizards often applied to druids in folklore and their class features show it!

The Druid is a divine caster with a fairly unique spell list...and a LOT of class features. Like a LOT. Most fullcasters are lucky to get two major class features. Familiars and Arcane School. Hex and Patrons. Mystery and Curses. You get THREE and all of them are incredibly versatile and useful. You are a powerful Generalist, and if built right, can handle any problem and fit into any role in the party!!! Yes, ANY ROLE. It’s my job to tell you how to be the monster that you were born to me. Let's get into it! 
The Chassis
* (3/5) Hit Die - D8: Not great. Not the worst, but not great! D8 is very common, but if you plan on being a melee druid, this hurts. If you are a caster druid, this is great! So middling. For Generalist Druids, most of us, you’ll want to have your spells back this up.
* (4/5) BAB - ¾ or (Medium): Easily the most common. Usually, not amazing because you don’t get that many attacks, and for most melee, more attacks is better. But wait...you are the druid...so you can get natural attacks...which means this is really only for accuracy's sake..and well there is plenty that can be done about that.
   * Don’t know what natural attacks are? That’s fine. I’ll explain it in the FAQ section.
* (3/5) Skills - 4+int: So it’s not...horrible! Better than the sorc...but you also aren’t an int based character..and have little reason to invest into your skills...so...not like actively terrible but also not super great? That said, the skills they have known are pretty nice.
   * Class Skills Worth Paying attention to:
      * Craft (Int): Technically you can do it...but you don’t get any bonus feats and you aren’t an int based character. So...it’s doable just not...great.
      * Fly (Dex): You can turn into a bird, and that means the DM can give you fly checks. So it’s nice to just have it on the list.
      * Handle Animal (Cha): You don’t have to have this, but it helps you teach your animal companion new tricks, and also, you are the druid. Handle the animals, you are really good at it.
      * Heal (Wis): Normally this isn’t great...until you get into skill unlocks + Healing hands to make you a healing BEAST. Make the Cleric think twice about giving you mouth.
      * Know. Geo (Int): Knowing stuff is helpful.
      * Know. Nature (int): Knowing stuff is helpful.
      * Perception (Wis): The most rolled skill in the game. Every class from every build uses this, and you are a Wisdom-based class that picks it up as a class skill. Top shelf. 
      * Ride (Dex): So, for most people this is red. For MOST PEOPLE, this is basically useless...BUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUT you can get an animal companion. That you can ride. That can actually be an amazing mount and save you lots of action economy if you like....soooooo yeah no put some points in this so you can pass the basic checks.
      * Spellcraft (Int): Identifying spells and helping with magic stuff. You are a fullcaster. This is nice. Woo! But you aren’t great at crafting.. .and we dont have a spell book. And we aren’t int based so less helpful for us… booo.
      * Survival (Wis): So I’m obligated to include this...because you are the druid...but it’s bad. And you will likely rarely use it...and the few things you use it for, you have spells for...so...yeah no it’s just...no….no….
   * Non Class Skills Worth Paying Attention To:
      * Acrobatics: Not getting hit by AoO’s is tight. 
      * Bluff/Diplomacy/Intimidate: So outside of Intimidation builds, these are social skills...which means their use is based around what the DM lets you get away with. So, unrateable. You aren’t a skills-based class, idk what to tell you.
      * All knowledges: Knowing stuff continues to be helpful
      * Stealth: Anti-perception. Not always useful, but when you fail a stealth check, you’ll wish you’d put more points into it.
      * Use Magic Device: You aren’t charisma based, BUT being able to use magic items that you aren’t supposed to is helpful
* (5/5) Saves - Good Fortitude and Will: Now that’s what I’m talking about! Sure, a Fireball is still a problem, but some of the most dangerous spells in Pathfinder hit your fort and will saves. Charm X, Cloudkill, Disintegrate, etc. You can heal from a Fireball. You can’t really cure a Domination. This stops it before it becomes a problem. NICE. 
* (1/5) Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: Ouch. Club, dagger, dart, quarterstaff, scimitar, scythe, sickle, shortspear, sling, and spear. That’s it. That’s all of it. Wait wait you say. We have proficiency in medium armor! Yeah… which is great… but you polymorph all the time and the armor can’t be metal...so unless you are the crafter, good luck getting darkwood. This uh...well it’s not the worst but it’s definitely not fun either.
Class Features
* (6/5) Spellcasting and Orisons [0-9, Prepared, Divine]: So this gets the very rare and prestigious rating of super bright pink god level good. This class feature is so good, so powerful that if you didn’t have any other class features, LITERALLY NO OTHER CLASS FEATURES, just this, you’d still be one of the STRONGEST CLASSES IN THE GAME. This is not an exaggeration.  Look at the wizard. Not only that, your spellcasting is particularly powerful because:
   * You are a Fullcaster: You get more spells than people have class features. Each one of these spells can basically be considered a once a day class ability, and you have DOZENS. Which only becomes stronger because...
   * You are a Prepared Caster: That means you can customize your abilities to the problem each day. Need to be the sneak lord? Prep spells for that. Need to scry and fry? Just switch it up. This gives you god-like versatility, so long as you have the right spells known. Which is super convenient because…
   * You can Prep anything on your Spell List: YES THAT'S RIGHT. ANYTHING. Your spell list is your spells known. Options options options. Options!!!! Anything you see on that list is game, which means that even super situational spells can be useful once in a blue moon!!! Not to mention…
   * You are a Divine Caster:  What does that mean? It means arcane armor penalties mean NOTHING to you. Yes, I know you will be polymorphing. Yes, I know what I said about your proficiencies. For the rare few of you who want to be in armor though, this is awesome!! It also opens you up to some unique feats that arcane casters can’t get access to AND a couple that SHOULD be cleric only...should. ;) 
* (5/5) Spontaneous Casting [Summon Nature’s Ally]: Hey, remember how spellcasting is busted? Your next ability lets you, a prepared caster, decide to use any of your slots to spontaneously cast one of the best spells in the game: Summon Nature’s Ally. Is it as good as Summon Monster? No. Is it better than 80% of the spells in the game? Heck yeah. And you can cast it at any level, whenever you want, no planning needed.
   * Having extra bodies is always helpful!
   * Pick up a ring of attunement (I suggest kami) to really have this pop off.
   * Want to be amazing at summoning? There’s a guide for that! It’s amazing and you should read it.
* (?/5) Alignment Spells: Basically, you aren’t allowed to cast spells of an alignment that opposes your own...but alignment is weird. So this kinda depends on how much your DM cares. Still, if your dm cares, this is just a nerf, but it depends on how alignment works.
* (3/5) Bonus Languages [Sylvan, Druidic]: You know sylvan and druidic...uh...well..that’s...well it’s not bad? But...also I mean it’s only useful if your DM cares about this, and languages aren’t that hard to get. Still, its free language, and Sylvan is a fun language.
* (5/5) Nature’s Bond: Technically...technically I should be giving this a mixed review because it depends on what you pick...but since you get to CHOOSE whose shtick you get to steal from (better ranger companion, cleric domains, or alchemist brews) that’s an easy 5/5. Seriously, why do druids get so much stuff???
   * (?/5)Domain: SO, getting access to domains is GREAT...but the power depends on what domain you pick. I’ll go get them rated later, but just know that having a domain gives you access to a number of neat supernatural abilities and extra spells!
      * Special Note 1: Choosing a domain gives you access to domain spell slots! Basically a free spell slot you get at each level to prepare your domain spell of that spell level or lower. Yay more staying power!!!
      * Special Note 2: Just by having a domain, you can get access to a number of neat little feats, because yes, we will be stealing the cleric’s shtick.
      * Special Note 3: Druids can select any subdomain of the cleric domains they have access to instead of the base domain, with the exception of Metal.
   * (5/5) Animal Companion: Battle buddy? Meat Shield? Armored Tank of Death? Scout? More bodies is more bodies, and having an entire other creature worth of action economy is amazing. If you don’t know what to pick? Pick an animal companion.
      * For Frontline Druids, they can make great flankers, shields, and fellow damage dealers. 
      * For Backline Druids, they can make amazing shields, keep enemies away from you and reposition teammates.
      * Special Note: Replacing animal companions is actually super easy. They can be dismissed whenever and getting a new one only requires 24 hours of prayer and maybe spending money to find a specific one if you want.
   * (3-5/5) Druidic Herbalism [Lvl 1-6/7+]: So at first you basically get brew potion, only specifically for spells on the druid list...and you can make a few for free. Cool. Whatever. Not bad, you can make a few equal to your Wis Mod and can make other potions. That’s nice or whatever.

Okay at 4th level, their potion-not-potions cost half money, and can be any spells, so long as you can cast them. So if you take something that lets you get some extra spells from another list, this is nicer. Sure. Still limited to third level obviously. So quarter cost potions from anything you can cast below level 4th, for 1/4th total cost. Nice.

Okay at 7th level...HOLY MOLY. You can make any potion-not-potion in ONE MINUTE. Any spell you can cast below level 4, you can have a potion whipped up in one minute! You get Wis-Mod of them for FREE. These are potions, remember, so they last indefinitely. Have fun getting some strong low level buffs set up every morning, from healing to ac, and having them just on hand. Sell them, hold them, congrats, your spell stamina just JUMPED.   

Well obviously that’s got to be the best part...wait what did you say...a huh..yeah...a huh...wait ALCHEMIST EXTRACTS??? WITH THE INFUSION DISCOVERY. You sacrifice a spell slot of that level to craft an extract of ANY SPELL YOU COULD CAST at ANY LEVEL. Now these special concoctions only last 24 hours...but they are free and now you can pass out the best personal spells on your list to whoever is on your team or at the very least, let’s you be a spontaneous caster. Don’t have the spell prepped? Make an extract!!! On its own, this is an amazing trick. It’d be even crazier if there were a way to...I don’t know...get access to incredibly powerful spells from the best list in the game. If you are a caster druid, this is your go to.

   * (2/5) Nature Sense: +2 to Know Nature and Survival. Oh okay...sure...I guess...um..thanks.
   * (2/5) Wild Empathy: Make weird Diplomacy checks on animals. So like...Charisma isn’t your main stat in most cases (but you’ll likely want to keep it at 14 in general) and you are the druid...which means you have spells to make animals like you...and also do whatever you say. So this is uh...i guess neat if you ever use it.
   * (2/5) Woodland Stride: Be immune to overgrown plants and don’t treat them as difficult terrain. This would be pretty cool...if it worked on magical undergrowth. As it is, it only matters if your DM specifically cares about this...which well...I’m not sure who does. 
   * Note: HAHA it’s Iluzry from the future. If you take the Ring of Sacred Mistletoe, this applies to your magical plants too!!! Thus bringing this ability up to Great, if not, Absolutely Amazing as YOU ARE THE PLANT PERSON!!! YOU DO ALL THE PLANTS.
   * (1/5) Trackless Step:  You can’t be tracked...yeah. That’s it. Look, you are going to be in a party...so unless ALL OF YOU are untrackable, this is basically useless in 9/10 games.
   * (3/5) Resist Nature’s Lure: +4 Bonus on saves against spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities from fey creatures. Also, any spells that affect plants. This is basically what woodland stride should be, and BARELY sneaks into green because it’s all SLA’s from fey and ALL plant affecting spells. 
   * (5/5) Wild Shape: The final of the Big Three reveals themselves! Wild shape! The ability to transform yourself into a little beastie for HOURS per level. This is one of the things that put the druid on the map, and for good reason. Polymorphing gives you access to new attacks, abilities, and buffs that can make you an amazing scout, melee combatant, and all around support. You don’t need to call the eagles, if you ARE the eagles. For Melee Druids, this is your best friend. For everyone else? It’s still great. Furries unite.
   * Oh and just as a cute side note, its supernatural. So it can’t be dispelled and you don’t take attacks of opportunity for using it. Ahahahahahaha.
   * Also if your DM does traits, consider Beast of Society, as it DOUBLES the duration of your wild shape if you become a small or medium animal...which is ya know a lot of them. That’s nutty.
   * (3/5) Venom Immunity: So now you are immune to poisons. YAY. While this may not come up all the time, when it counts, you’ll remember. Ya know, between being able to turn into animals, and manipulate the world, druids are strangely good assassins. I mean, the only thing that would make them better is if they could turn into different people! 
   * (3/5) Thousand Faces: ...Okay, I asked for that. Still, at-will Alter Self is fun, and can be even more fun in social games. The only reason it isn’t ranked higher is because it’s a second level spell, and at this level you should be ruling cities, and warping fate and well...you can do better than this.
   * (1/5) Timeless Body: Now you get to be...Immune...to aging….ah...hm...wow, that is even lamer than it looks. So, okay, the main thing about this is that there aren’t many things that can make you age in the game. So being immune to aging only matters if your game lasts forever, or you are thrown into a time vortex… neither of which are very common!!!!
   * Capstones: So capstones are weird. Normally you wouldn’t really get one, and well most campaigns do not reach level 20. That said, Chronicles of Legends released a bunch of optional alternate prestige classes...that I have to rank individually. Gosh darnit.
   * (4/5) The Great Beast (Su): Your animal companion gets a +4 to STR/DEX/CON/WIS. So for people who stan animal companions, I mean, this is great...but better than a minor artifact?
   * (3/5) Home Ground (Su): Constant commune with nature and +4 to your caster level...so long as you stay in your secret lair area. Doesn’t really say how big the area can be but these aren’t the most AMAZING effects. 
   * (5/5) With This Sword (Ex): You gain a Noble Phantasm minor artifact!!! This is not only powerful, but also really really cool. Love that.
   * (4/5) Won’t Stay Dead (Ex): Once per week, when you should lose, you don’t. 
   * (5/5) Perfect Body, Flawless Mind (Ex): Get 8 points that can be added to any ability score in any way. 5 to one, 3 to another. Best strat? Add 6 to your main stat and 2 to your secondary stat.
   * (5/5) The Boss (Ex): Get super leadership! Luckily everything else is so busted at this level, so this is fine.
________________
