# Character Creation — The Making of a Seer

One of the first impressions that experienced players might start to get as they review the Oracle class is, “Holy crap, how is the power curve on these guys so high?” And it’s true, Oracles pack a lot of punch. Between full casting, a d8 HD and ¾ BAB, medium armor proficiency, and the various Revelations and bonus spells granted by your Mystery, there’s practically nothing you can’t do with some degree of success, so long as you’ve focused your build on it. That’s not something every class can boast of: no matter how you build a single-class Wizard, for example, it’s unlikely that she’ll ever become a capable melee combatant. Here are a few important, universal points to consider as you build and play your Oracles:

Some Oracles are dependent on CHA, and some are not. Some roles that Oracles fill need to have high CHA scores in order to take advantage of better Spell Save DCs; these roles include anything that primarily targets enemies, such as Debuffers or Blasters. If you intend primarily to buff your team or yourself, the need for CHA diminishes, as you won’t be plowing through enemy saves to get to your goal. Regardless of your build goals, all Oracles should try to start with at least 15 CHA, then bump up to 16 at their earliest convenience. You are locked out of casting your spells unless your CHA score is equal to 10 + the spell level, and you don’t want to reach 6th-level spells at Level 12, only to discover that you didn’t invest enough CHA to even cast them.

Oracles are meant to be secondary combatants, not primary combatants. Mysteries like Metal, Battle, Godclaw, and Outer Rifts can turn you into a pretty hardy attacker; this does not mean, however, that the Oracle class was created with full-on martial status in mind. Without your self-buffing, you’ll always be squishier, less accurate, and less fortitudinous than nearly all of your martial cousins. Don’t tempt fate here.

Make sure you know why you’re picking your spells known. Spontaneous casters are primarily limited by their choices of spells known, and even Favored Class Bonuses like the Human’s don’t do much to alleviate the problem. Oracles and other spontaneous casters can only afford to select the best of the best spells, because whatever they pick, they’re stuck with. You can determine which spells might be qualified candidates by submitting them to the following litmus test: ask yourself, Will I use this spell every day? Can this spell affect multiple allies or enemies? Does it last long enough to be effective? Which save does it target, and is that a strong save for enemies at this level? Even if the enemy passes their save, will it give me a partial effect? Will this spell be effective several levels from now? If you find yourself giving negative responses to any of those questions, view the spell with extreme suspicion. Building a spontaneous caster is like becoming a bodybuilder: you’ve got to be as lean as possible if you want to win. Not an ounce of fat, remember?

Some Revelations are always, always good; some are almost always bad. Blast Revelations and touch-range damage Revelations suck almost universally, whereas Revelations that increase your AC or grant you novel movement modalities like flight or Earth Glide are almost always excellent.

Pick your feats carefully. Oracle is one of the few classes in Pathfinder that receives no bonus feats of any kind, barring specific Revelations like Weapon Mastery (Battle) or Starlight Agility (Solar). As with spells known, you can’t afford any fat in your build where feats are concerned: feats like Combat Expertise are nuisances for Fighters, but they’re absolute poison for you.
