# Equipment — A Seer's Tools

## A Few Notes

This section is pretty short: “But wait, Aller,” I hear you saying, “didn’t you do a huge section on weapon enchantments and wondrous items for your Inquisitor guide?” To which I reply, Yes, but I’ve since poured a lot of hours into a little project called The Armamentarium, which is meant to be an exhaustive shorthand guide to every slotted Wondrous Item and unique weapon or armor in Pathfinder. Take a good look at the item tags contained therein, and you’ll be a long, long way toward finding Wondrous Items and other magical armaments that fit your playstyle. A quick search of the [Oracle] tag, for example, reveals the cassock of the black monk, the ring of revelation series, and the amulet of the spirit series. Searching for other tags like [Melee] or [Divination] will yield similar results, as befits the role your Oracle fills.

Regarding bonus progression and “The Big Six”: Of course, many of the cool items that you see in The Armamentarium won’t be open to you as-is, because Pathfinder encounters are balanced around a group of items collectively termed The Big Six: a magic weapon, magic armor, Cloak of Resistance, Ring of Protection, Amulet of Natural Armor, and stat-boosting belt/headband. If you don’t have or aren’t wearing those items, you’re far more likely to die than teammates who do have or are wearing those items. But it kinda stinks, right? I mean, why go to all the trouble of creating dozens, if not hundreds, of magical items for those slots if players can’t then use them? Funny you should mention that. Enter Automatic Bonus Progression. Under this ruleset, PCs exchange half their wealth by level for free, scaling resistance bonuses, stat increases, and bonuses to deflection/natural armor. This allows them to use their five newly vacated slots for all the many Wondrous Items that Pathfinder authors spend time lovingly crafting. I’ve played at tables with and without similar rules, and without a doubt, the ones where players are allowed to wear the cool niche equipment are more fun, at least in my experience. It also looks as if Pathfinder 2e is moving toward this system, so get hip to the new vibes, cat.

Regarding shields: Oracles are proficient with shields, which means that they’re worth taking a look at. I’d recommend them most highly for pure casting builds who won’t miss having a weapon drawn; they do provide a nice AC bump, and you can purchase +4 armor and a +3 shield for the price of +5 armor. That’s what I call bang for your buck, bucko.

Regarding armor proficiencies: Heavy armor proficiency isn’t something that all Oracles have access to, but Metal, Battle, and Godclaw Oracles will sure want to take a hard look. Do note that a Mithral Breastplate can get you pretty dang close to heavy armor levels of AC, but without the crazy ACPs and movement decreases.
