# Feats

Feats
General Feats
   * (4/5) Extra Performance: Get 6 more rounds of performance! Most people won’t actually need more than this since it scales really well. Bards that get less performances or plan on multiclassing out. That said, its great at low levels, and means bardic masterpiece users don’t have to worry as much.
   * (5/5) ✰Master Performer✰: So this is a first party feat that was made FOR a specific faction but, if that faction doesnt exist in your world, no reason your DM can’t ya know just let you have it. Why is it 5/5? Well it boosts the bonuses granted to allies for all bardic performances by 1…all of them. Heroics? Yes. Competence? Absolutely. Courage? You know it. Yeah. You want this. You absolutely want this.
   * (5/5) ✰Grandmaster Performer✰: Hey remember the thing from before? Its that but with another bonus.
   * (5/5) Verbose Performer: MAKE PERFORMANCES BIGGER. Gets even better if you consider masterpieces bardic performances. But seriously range matters, and again, this applies to ALL bardic performances.
   * (3/5) Silent Performer: When you absolutely need to be silent and normally couldn’t, this is great but its also EXPENSIVE!!! Really expensive.
   * (5/5) ✰Lingering Performance✰: Hey wanna TRIPLE your bardic performance uptime? Here you go! It doesn’t look like much at first until you realise you can always stop your performances as a free action, and as you get later in the game, starting you performances gets easier, and fights usually aren’t as long. If you use one round to start the performance, and then end your turn, congrats, you’ve used 1 round of bardic performance to get 3 rounds worth of effect. There is a reason why bardic masterpieces had to specifically call this out. It’s that good!!!!
   * (5/5) ✰Improved Dirge of Doom✰: IF they were shaken when you started your dirge of doom they IMMEDIATELY become frightened. ALSO the range of dirge of doom extends out to 60 feet, which is hilariously huge.They can only be affected by this feat once per 24 hours but like…will you really need to do this twice? I don’t think so. Hilarious boost to one of your best performances, take it and run. Combos fantastically with the spell blistering invective. 
   * (5/5) Greater Dirge of Doom: Dirge of doom now LINGERS on a target for two extra rounds (Oh hey lingering performance, i see that you probably stack. Nice!) AND if they were already frightened they get upgraded to panicked!!! Now its harder to get frightened than it is to get shaken but…if you have lingering performance you can just stop your performance and then immediately start it the next round to autopanic people while they take the penalties of frightened…which is funny as hell.
   * (5/5)* Battle Singer (Goblins Only): If you, for some reason, have a goblin only party, this lets you get your inspire courage bonus to ALL SAVES which is very impressive especially with how high inspire courage can get, and how rare morale bonus to saves are. That said…all goblin party. 
   * (5/5) Discordant Voice: HAHAHA so remember how i said 1d6 damage per turn is bad? An extra 1d6 sonic damage PER ATTACK is not. With the amount of attacks martials can throw out, and will with full attacks, this can get to hilarious levels, and remember, sonic damage is VERY rarely resisted.
   * (5/5) Wind Song: HEY having the ability to do your performances from a range so that you can put good performances on you team without having to be in melee range or bad performances on your enemies is REALLY FUN! :D MORE VERSATILITY IS DOPE.
   * (5/5) Spellsong: So the hiding spell trick here is cool and all but the REAL fun of it is that you can maintain spells as a move action instead of a standard action while spending bardic performances, so you can keep casting!!! Combine this with gnomes' effortless trickery and you can end up with three different concentration spells at once! WOOOOO!
   * (5/5) Spell Focus (Enchantment) / (5/5) Greater Spell Focus (Enchantment): So in most cases, I don’t rate these feats too highly, but the Bard is not most cases. It just so happens that we are a class that has a GREAT deal of spells of a single spell school that REQUIRE difficult save DC’s for which WE do not have enough save DC due to our spell level disparity. As such, it is INCREDIBLY worth it to take spell focus, as you WILL be getting use out of it one way or the other.
   * (4/5) Inspiring Mentor: Hey everyone in 30 feet becomes more competent! Great for perception checks, or other checks that multiple people can get a chance at.
   * (4/5) Omnipresent Mentor: Permanent Competence! Spend 4 rounds of performance to give an ally the effects of inspire competence for the entire day!!!! Only to a single skill mind you, but its still a buff and we love that!
   * (4/5) Harmonic Spell: Hey whenever you cast a spell, you don’t have to spend that round of bardic performance maintaining the performance. Moreover, you can switch performances as a swift action with no downtime in between! This pairs AMAZINGLY with spellsong, in which you can get a spellslinger bard, constantly dancing and warping minds what feels like indefinitely.
   * (5/5) Versatile Spontaneity: Congrats, you are now a prepared caster. Prepare one that is on your list from a written source, be it a scroll, or a spellbook. If you do it from a scroll, the scroll is expended. If you do it from a spellbook it is not. It uses a spell slot one higher than its actual level and it takes 10 minutes per spell level to prepare...AND ITS STILL FUCKING AMAZING. Getting to have a spellbook of spells that you can search through when your (hopefully) well crafted list doesn’t help is huge. Pairs very well with Arrowsong’s Lament and a Ring of Spell Knowledge for plenty of hot swapable spells.
   * (4/5) Emergency Attunement: This makes otherwise situational spells really adaptable, as you just need to make a baby spellcraft check and can just...switch it. Being able to alter options after the fact is really useful for all prestige classes and remember, you have SKILLS TO SPARE so this shouldn’t be too bad for you.
   * (4/5) Improved Initiative: Going first is amazing! It’s a pretty solid bonus.
   * (4/5) Noble Scion (Scion of War): Remember, we want to get Charisma to as many things as we can. Initiative is going first, and going first is winning first. This should almost always get you a bonus higher than improved initiative, and guess what, they stack! Realistically though, you’ll only need one or the other.
   * (3/5) Toughness: Look it’s not complex, but it helps. You don’t have a lot of health and so having more, even just one per level, is nice.
   * (3/5) Skill Focus or (3/5) Exotic Heritage: Both of these are Meh feat tax pre-reqs that you need to get to the actually juicy stuff. You take the skill you need to get into the bloodline you want. That said, you do like certain skills a lot, like bluff, so this is less bad for you than usual. 
   * (3/5) Eldritch Heritage / (5/5) Improved / (3/5) Greater: So in effect, you get bloodline powers! Sorcerer bloodlines can be incredibly impactful, and if chosen wisely, can completely change how a character plays. The first feat gets you the 1st level power, the second gets you the 3rd or 9th (both of which can often be devastatingly powerful) and the third gets you the 15th level power, but you’ll rarely go that far. You should easily meet the pre-reqs so its really about what power you want!
   * If you want suggestions, check out my sorcerer guide.
   * (5/5) Knowledgeable Spellcaster: Okay so this one is hilariously powerful because in exchange for a knowledge roll, you can get +3 to overcoming SR and then when you have 10 ranks, its +5. That beasts out and stacks with spell penetration and all you have to do is be decent at knowing things. 1000% worth it. YOU ARE THE BARD. yOU KNOW EVERYTHING!!! THIS SHOULD BE A CAKEWALK!


Metamagic Feats
So even more than full casters, we really can’t afford to take metamagic feats that are more than a +1. That doesn’t mean that you don’t want them! Just that we have to be a lot more careful about choosing them.


   * (6/5) Sacred Geometry: Free metamagic. FREE METAMAGIC. Combined with the right metamagic feats, this ability is downright godly, the qualifications are dirt easy and you can make every spell unstoppable. Why don’t most people take it? Well all of that horrible math of course! If only someone had made an online easily accessible and useful calculator...hint...hint!
   * (1-6/5) Ascendant Spell (+5): Okay so basically, ascendant spell lets you cast a spell as its MYTHIC version which is...completely ridiculous. All mythic spells are just straight up better versions of the base spell, and getting access to them in non mythic games is great...or it would be if it didnt bring you up +5 spell levels. Damn. If only we had a way, that was relatively easy, to be able to use metamagic without raising the actual level of the spell! Then well this would be amazing wouldn’t it? Probably busted.
   * (5/5) Spell Perfection: More free metamagic! Very late game, but its incredibly useful, and all that it asks from you is that you take more metamagic! Can do!!! (Also remember that it doubles ANY other feat based numerical bonuses. Caster level, DC, anything.)
   * (5/5) Extend Spell (+1): Doubles your duration. Short sweet, gets the job done, great for long term buffs or other effects. Definitely worth picking up. Being able to extend buffs, or potent boosting effects is really useful to us.
   * (5/5) Persistent Spell (+2): Effectively roll twice and take the lowest for all saves involved with the spell. Bards have A LOT of save or sucks/loses. For a lot of later game spells, it’s save or be absolutely destroyed, so this can be an INCREDIBLY useful power to have. Incredibly. Very very worth picking up mid to late game.
   * (5/5) Piercing Spell (+1): Hey do you know that SR is the worst? Like the absolute worst? This makes your enemies SR count as being 5 lower and only raises your spell level by 1. This can and will save your ass at least once so it’s a good pick up.
   * (5/5) Bouncing Spell (+1): HEY failsafe spell. Really good for getting another try at those save or sucks, especially if you just need to get somebody in general to get the flow going!
   * (5/5) Heighten Spell: Usually, whatever, just makes a spell count as a higher level than it is. Gives you some extra DC’s
   * (4/5) Encouraging Spell (+1): Boost your morale bonuses a little bit! It’s not crazy, but we have A LOT of morale bonuses to throw around, so you’ll almost always find a use for it.
   * (3.5/5) Scarring Spell (+1): So if you hit with a fear or emotion effect they get a -2 to all the rest of them for some really fun snowballing. Now it doesn’t stack with itself, but even a -2 can be helpful in the long run.
   * (4/5) Usurping Spell (+1): AYE if they fail a saving throw against your spell, they now count as an ally for flanking purposes AND cannot make any AoO’s against you. Nice little defensive and offensive trick, and they really just have to fail their save once.
   * (5/5) Threatening Illusion (Gnome Only) (+1): Your illusions now threaten squares!!! We have a lot of illusions, so gnome bards get a LOT from this.
Combat Feats
   * (4/5) Flagbearer: Morale bonus to attack and damage stacks with our usual competence bonus to attack and damage. If you are picking this up its mandatory that you get a Banner of Ancient Kings to keep your bonuses competitive. A fun trick is putting this feat on a long spear using the “Training” weapon enchantment. That way, you dont have to spend the feat, and its literally attached to the spear where you will be hanging your banner! WIN WIN WIN!
   * (4/5) Arcane Strike: As a swift action, do a bit more damage. It’s again, one of the few scaling bonuses to damage, so we like it for that! Since we DO be casting arcane spells this a easy way for bards to get damage to keep up with the frontliners, especially since our swift action is usually free.
   *  (5/5) Spell Cartridge / (4/5) Infused Spell Cartridge: Did you want spell bullets? This is how you get spell bullets. Spell cartridge is AMAZING because it takes out the need to reload, which is what holds a lot of firearms back from being amazing. Infused basically gives you a ranged spellstrike-lite, which we might actually be able to use, but it involves a lot of feats.
   * (4/5) Combat Reflexes: Extra attacks of opportunity! Extra smacks are extra smacks!!!
   * (4/5) Diva Style / (1/5) Diva Strike / (4/5) Diva Advance: Style all around perform feinting! Diva style is good for giving you move action fient that you can capitalize on later. Diva strike is…god awful honestly, but Diva advance lets you fient from range, for possible RANGE SNEAK ATTACKS. AGain, best for sandmen bards who can really take advantage of this.


Ranged Combat Feats (Archery and Gun/Crossbow)
   * (3/5) Point Blank Shot (5/5) Precise Shot:  Are you doing ranged combat? Yes? Then these feats are your prerequisites. You WILL be taking them. Point blank shot is just connected to too many ranged feats.
   * (5/5) Clustered Shots: Getting to add all of your damage BEFORE dr is amazing.
   * (5/5) Rapid Shot / Manyshot: Get more arrow attacks! These feats are part of why ranged can be such a powerful playstyle!!!
   * (4/5) Snap Shot / (3.5/5) Improved Snap Shot: You get a tiny threat range with your bow, and can eventually get REACH to have some attacks of opportunity with your bow. Again, not really necessary, but like, it feels nice to get some extra shots in, especially when its not your turn.
   * (3.5/5) Improved Precise Shot: Ignore ac bonuses from anything less than total cover, and miss chance from anything besides TOTAL concealment. This can really help if you DM is taking advantage of these rules, and being tactical, but if you aren’t having this issue, then its not necessary.
   * (5/5) Deadly Aim: Do you plan to be in ranged combat...at all? Take this feat. Why? It is one of the three scaling damage feats in the game. Yes, that's right. Scaling. Most pathfinder feats give you a static bonus at best, much less get better as you level up! If you are in combat, you are taking one of these!!!! No questions!!!!
   * (3/5) Hammer the Gap: Each attack does a little more damage! Considering we are planning on making A LOT of attacks, this is very helpful, but very not necessary.
   * (5/5) Rapid Reload: HEY Are you using a crossbow or a gun? Yes? Take this. It makes it easier to reload and that means you can attack more. So like…yeah you need this. Mandatory.


Finesse Combat Feats
   * (5/5) Weapon Finesse: Let's use dex to attack. Do you intend to do that? Then boom this is your feat.
   * Weapon Focus / Fencing Grace or Starry Grace or Slashing Grace: If you do dex to attack, these are dex to damage and you love them, but the feat tax sucks. Remember you do get proficiency in rapiers! You either take this or agile.
   * Dervish Dance: Okay does the same thing as the above feats but guess what? Less feat tax, yay!
   * (5/5) Piranha Strike: Do you plan to be in combat...at all? Take this feat. Why? It is one of the three scaling damage feats in the game. Yes, that's right. Scaling. Most pathfinder feats give you a static bonus at best, much less get better as you level up! If you are in combat, you are taking one of these!!!! No questions!!!!


Intimidation Feats
   * (4/5) Intimidating Prowess: Add Strength to Charisma for intimidate. Simple nice boost that we will be enjoying for melee strength builds.
   * (5/5) Soulless Gaze {x2 Damnation Feats}: So most damnation feats are GARBAGE but this one is absolutely terrifying. Just taking this feat on its own is basically nothing, just a measly +2 but taking a second damnation feat with it gives you the HORRIFYING ability to increase people's fear effects instead of simply applying them from a demoralize. This means if a guy repeatedly fails their save (which btw they probably will) you can get them cowering in seconds. You WANT this sooo bad if you are doing a fear build
   * (5/5) Signature Skill (Intimidate): You can only take it at level 5 but you will love it so dearly. This lets you start applying more deadly fear effects from the beginning and then just makes them worse. Hell yes. All intimidation builds are taking this feat, no questions asked!!!!
   * (5/5) Power Attack: Do you plan to be in combat...at all? Take this feat. Why? It is one of the three scaling damage feats in the game. Yes, that's right. Scaling. Most pathfinder feats give you a static bonus at best, much less get better as you level up! If you are in combat, you are taking one of these!!!! No questions!!!!
   * (5/5) Cornugon Smash: Okay we can apply fear effects to people, and can stack them on top of one another. How do we do this all in LESS than a standard action. Well I welcome you to Cornugon Smash. For the low low cost of hitting someone with Power Attack (something again, you should be doing anyway) you get a FREE demoralize attempt…which goes with intimidate skill. Badda boom Badda bing, now anyone who gets caught in the aura catches this horrific fade.
   * (4/5) Hurtful: By demoralizing someone you can get an additional attack on them as a swift action…which we should be doing a lot. This and Cornugon Smash make it so that you are getting a LOT of extra attacks over the course of the game, even not considering haste…and if you miss their condition ends but so what!!! Just hit the bitch again!!!! 
   * (4/5) Dazzling Display: Full-Round action to demoralize everyone within 30 feet. Now when you can only shaken, this is a sort of meh use of your time…but once you can get frightened and higher fear statuses, this starts to become a KILLER crowd control mechanic.
   * (5/5) Shatter Defense: Hey anyone who is feared counts as being flatfooted against you, which makes them much easier to hit, procs other abilities and in general ruins their day while making you a beast
   * (3/5) Intimidating Performance: Perform intimidates when you start performances! On its own its whatever, but when combined with dazzling display it gets MUCH BETTEr letting you start off a battle with a mass demoralize.
