# Bardic Masterpieces

Bardic Masterpieces
A rare and not so spoken about ability in bards, bardic masterpieces are unique abilities that use your bardic performance rounds to perform new and crazy effects. Think about them as optional performances! To get a bardic masterpiece, you have to pay its cost and you can only do so if you have meet the pre-reqs.


Q: “Are Bardic Masterpieces Bardic Performances Mechanically?”
A: So probably???? It says they are strange applications, and a lot of the masterpieces wouldn’t make sense without the context (How do you maintain a masterpieces? Is it a free action? No action?). I’m willing to rule that they count, which means that you can use your duplication spells to begin masterpieces, but also means you can’t stack masterpieces and performances natively.

Note that unless otherwise noted, anything that extends the duration of a bardic performance dont work on a bardic masterpiece, and if it takes a standard action to activate normally, and you can start your bardic performance more quickly, you may use the faster activation time.
	



Cost: You may exchange a feat or a spell known to get access to a performance. The spell must be at least as high as what is listed in the performance, and you can exchange higher level spells known for masterpieces with lower costs. You can only pay the cost if you meet the prerequisites.

Perform Prerequisite: These are the minimum skill ranks in a particular performance skill that are required to be able to gain access to a particular bardic masterpiece. There are occasionally other prerequisites, such as languages, or races


So for brevity's sake I’ll be shortening a lot of what is need. Since you can purchase any bardic performance with a feat, ill skip listing that and instead write down the level of spell that you’d need to exchange and it’s skill pre-reqs

Key: Name [Minimum Spell Level Cost] (# of ranks - Prerequisite perform skill, Other)


Example: Doot Doot Murder Flute [3rd] (7 - Wind)


   * (2/5) Ancients' Flight [5th] (13 - Oratory, Speak Draconic): So you learn the dragon’s national anthem! It takes a full round action to activate, and then the dragons get a will save. IF they fail they HAVE to patriotically sing the dragon national anthem, meaning no spells, no fire breath, biting or otherwise. If you are fighting dragons all the time, this can be super powerful…but chances are you aren’t fighting dragons every day.
   * (3/5) Anthem of Pageantry [3rd] (7 - String or Wind): Make a room extra sexy. It takes 1 minute to activate and only costs 1 round per 10 minutes but this is…vastly just used for style points.
   * (5/5) ✰Arrowsong’s Lament✰ [1st*] (3 - Oratory): So this is…hilariously good. Has nothing to do with arrows, but really good. Basically you get a free slot of whichever level spell you traded. Using 3 rounds of performance per level and 1 hour, you can basically prep a single spell from a spellbook/meditation book, scroll, or other arcane writing. If its on the bard spell list, great, it just has to be equal to the spell level you sacrificed or lower. If its on the wizard list???? Its two levels of power. Now…that doesn’t come up often..but this expands your versatility GREATLY. It also means that you can trade out lower level slots for the ability to prep higher level ones, because you are only limited by the spells you CAN cast, and the total spell levels you've spent on the masterpiece. This is versatile spontaneity but better. You should be taking this whenever you can, if not, make sure to pick it up late!
   * (4/5) At the Heart of It All [3rd] (7 - String or Wind): Basically when you need to make sure your dominate person lands, or when you want to make sure that you can be extra persuasive with a person, will save to boost your skills. The bonus lasts all day, so it’s useful in the long run, but not at all combat viable. Best used to set up other abilities by increasing their DC’s.
   * (2/5) Ballad of the Homesick Wanderer [2nd] (5 - Oratory or Sing, Speak Planar Language): So IF someone has something summoned AND it fails its willsave you…half the duration. Not even send it back. If the creature is called (which only really comes from planar binding) then it just…gets basically shaken??? This ain’t…ain’t great.
   * (3/5) Ballad of the Warding Princess [4th] (10 - Oratory or Sing): So effectively its a pre-buff which forces you to spend a minute singing and then halves your base speed in exchange for +4 AC from soft cover (which basically stacks with everything) for 10 minutes. Having more AC is great but halving your speed isn’t ideal. Cast a haste-like to get you back up to speed.
   * (4/5) Banshee's Requiem [6th] (17 - Sing): Fort save or take two negative levels every turn. Yes its expensive. Yes fort saves are the most easily resisted. Yes this WILL snowball people who don’t have the saves to keep up, and by the time you get it, that's a death sentence. Gets much better if you abuse a tuned bowstring.
   * (5/5) Battle Song of the People's Revolt [2nd] (4 - Wind or Percussion): Bet you weren’t expecting Tactician huh? Neither was I. Gives you a free teamwork feat for choosing it, and only costs one round of performance per round to give it to all of your allies within 30 feet. If used wisely, this can be JUST as potent as inspire courage, if not more so. If used creatively…it becomes a force to be reckoned with. Looking at you Army Across Time. ALSO AFFECTED BY DURATION BOOSTERS
   * (5/5) ✰Blazing Rondo✰ [3rd] (7 - Oratory or Percussion): This is HASTE one of if not the best buff spells in the game…but better, because the attack, ac, and reflex bonuses SCALE. AND NOT EVEN TERRIBLY???? This is objectively 100% better than inspire courage, and you should be picking this up as soon as possible to use this instead so that you can cast other spells. This is dumb. Why is this allowed? Sure this is fatigued after but WHO CARES??? BETTER HASTE???
   * (3/5) Clamor Of the Heavens [5th] (10 - Percussion or Sing): So the effect is good. Stunning, blinding and deafening are all very fucked up things you can do…BUT if they are blinded and deafened, most of your new performances/masterpeices wont work. More importantly it takes THREE WHOLE ROUNDS to get it started, which by then…probably could have just killed it.
   * (3/5) Dance of Captivating Desire [2nd] (5 - Dance): Make a thirst post irl and attempt to turn one creature within 30ft into a SIMP. Every round they have to make a will save to avoid simping harder, with every failure making it easier to convince them of anything and damaging their will saves against other enchantment effects. On its own its not so impressive but it makes a GREAT combination effect with another enchantment based performance.
   * (2/5) Death of Heroes [3rd] (7 - Oratory or Sing): So this one is more funny than I find it useful. Basically if they fail their save, they think that all of their friends got sent to hell. No cap, just…straight up go to hell. Mechanically this just means they treat all of their friends as invisible and silent, and they are shaken…that said this is absolutely hilarious.
   * (5/5) Dirge of the Torn Sail [2nd] (7 - String or Sing): So EVERYONE within 30 ft of your has to make a will save or fucking leave…which is like frightening performance but better because it is technically not a mind effecting or compulsion effect…it just like works like one. That said, it is…everyone. So either you win the fight because everyone runs away…or you lose the fight because your team runs away. Bring earplugs/5. Also effected by duration boosters!!
   * (1/5) Endless Waltz of the Eldest [2nd] (4 - Dance or String): So we have other healing options that are probably better…and this is using one of our performances…which could be used on a bunch of things…like better haste. Or better dirge.
   * (1/5) Exhilarating Prayer of Grace [2nd] (4 - Dance): Takes a while to set up, not a huge bonus. Skip!
   * (1/5) Fafnheir and the First King [2nd] (6 - String or Wind): Does nothing that a good diplomacy check wouldn’t have done and probably easier.
   * (1/5) Findelalara's Refuge [4th] (10 - Oratory or Dance): Create Igloo. Yep. Maybe just bring a tent???
   * (4/5) Fugue de Rue d'Auseil [6th] (15 - String): No save anti-horror sphere. Roll performance and your sphere can be that big but ya know it keeps people off you. That’s really dope and can be used to be a bastard. Great against hordes.
   * (5/5) Hymn of Restorative Harmonics [3rd] (6 - String or Wind): YAY STATUS CLEAR!!! We love status-clear abilities. This will save everyone’s life at least once!
   * (5/5)* Hymn of Sacred Lands [5th] (16 - Oratory or Sing): So this doesn’t seem like its for players??? Okay so it has to be a place you've lived for a month…which is already a tall order. But assuming you can do that, its basically 30 minutes for an entire week of guards and wards…so great for when you have a base to defend. Otherwise? Skip.
   * (1/5) Illusion's Decree (Comedy, Oratory) [2nd] (5 - Comedy or Oratory): Just use distraction forehead. No seriously, it’s probably a better idea in most cases.
   * (1/5) Kaminari Drums (Percussion) [4th] (10 - Percussion): 5 full rounds…for a SINGLE flame strike. For a fourth level spell…at level 10….GET THAT SHIT OUTTA HERE.
   * (?/5) Legato Piece on the Infernal Bargain [4th] (11 - String): So…i can’t really rate this because while planar ally has the POTENTIAL to be an amazing spell..it’s completely out of your hand. If you don’t know the name of the creature you are calling its basically just a slot machine, and 100% up to your DM. As such…uh…hope you have a good DM.
   * (4/5) Life Budding In Salted Earth [3rd] (4 - Sing, String, or Wind): Fast Healing the performance, with the ability to scale by spending more bardic performance. Costs a lot of performance but it heals everyone within thirty feet and that's nice! Goes up to hilarious levels of chaos if used with a Tuned Bowstring as it COMPLETELY covers each round to maintain meaning that you can spend your 5 rounds at the beginning and never worry about it again so long as you daka.
   * (?/5) Lingering Leitmotif (Oratory, Sing) [2nd] (4 - Sing or Oratory): So I’d love to rate this for the life of me I have no idea what inspire confidence is. Doesn’t show up anywhere, isn’t any of our base performances and isn’t a feat or anything so…eh???????????????????
   * (1/5) Melody of Frightful Death (String) [3rd] (7 - String): 1d6 damage every round is…really bad. Like REALLY bad. Horrible really. 1d6 every round WITH A SAVE????????????????? Hell no.
   * (2/5) Melody of Surrender [2nd] (4 - Sing or Wind): Strictly inferior to Dirge of Doom which has no save, and we get for free except for when fighting things that are immune to mind affecting.
   * (?/5) Minuet of the Midnight Ivy (Dance) [2nd] (4 - Dance): Fun wall walking shenanigans and some terrain movement! 
   * (6/5) ✰Music Beyond The Spheres✰ [5th] (13 - Dance, Sing, or String): Warlock wish! I don’t know what else I need to tell you. This is one of the most infamous and powerful abilities bards get access to, and if you have a way of healing ability damage, you can basically have unlimited limited wishes without cost…which is REAL nice. You should pick this up as soon as you are able, as it allows you to basically cast outside of your league!
   * (1/5) Night Queen’s Fury [3rd] (7 - Oratory or Act): Hey we don’t actually like planning around getting hurt…we aren’t a tank. Better to just curse them outright.
   * (5/5) ✰Pageant of the Peacock✰ [2nd] (4 - Act or Dance): Ah yes the OTHER infamous ability. You wanna suddenly know everything? This is how you know everything. Between this and bardic knowledge, you should be able to pass EVERY SINGLE knowledge check.
   * (3/5) Pallavi of Nirvana’s Blossoming [4th] (11 - Dance): Unleash the power of the Sun! But seriously, it isn’t often you find an ability that can produce true sunlight without the sun, and it lasts for a long while (1 minute per bard level) without maintenance! Even gives you plant growth. Still, while all of those things are neat, they aren’t things that we absolutely need.
   * (2/5) Ragadahn's Raqs Beledi [2nd] (5 - Dance): You can get through small spaces…IDK what this would be super important, I’m not sure how many GM’s even KNOW that there are squeezing rules.
   * (1/5) Ragadahn's Spiraling Ascent [3rd] (7 - Act or Dance): Twister levitation. This is…a neat trick but once fly starts going around that is objectively better. Noooot really worth a 3rd level bard spell in my opinion.
   * (2/5) Rat Quadrille [2nd] (4 - Percussion, or Sing): So its basically like dirge of doom but with a will save and being targeted. Luckily it lasts 10 minutes or even 1 minute if they fail. Unluckily, dirge of doom hits basically the same people with no save.
   * (2/5) Relentless Reprise [2nd] (4 - Keyboard, Sing, String, or Wind): Earworm the performance. Just get whatever radio bop you want stuck in their heads. Now…again…this isn’t something you are really going to be doing often. Like this lasts days and usually most people you use your performance on aren’t going to live that long, or will be able to be a problem far before this, or can ignore it by…sleeping a bit more.
   * (3/5) Rondeau of Heavenly Order [2nd] (4 - Sing): Will save or become a rook. This can be good for being able to control your enemies movement, and turning everything into a chess game, but I really don’t think its the best use of your performance.
   * (4/5) Song of Extinction [6th] (15 - Sing, String or Wind): So this one was on AON and you can only learn from a music box called, the song of extinction. Basically its an earthquake that also sends you to hell. It uses ALL of your bardic performance, but those who fail basically suffocate to death and for every person who does, you don’t age a year. Yeah this is kinda evil..but still good though. Wish the save was higher, but you could always just use it on some commoners…
   * (5/5) ✰Song of Sarkoris✰ (Oratory, Sing) [4th] (10 - Oratory or Sing): So this one is actually kinda terrifying. You see, we don’t actually have a lot of hit die. At the lowest level allowed, we’d have 10. If an enemy deals more than TEN DAMAGE my ally gets an AoO. And not just any AoO. An AoO that can be done against ANYONE in their reach, and DOES NOT count against your maximum number. You don’t even need combat reflexes to make this hilariously good. ALSO it resolves before the attack, but you still have to take the damage. If you have a team full of martials, GO THE FUCK OFF!!!! 
   * (1/5) Song of the Stonebearers [3rd] (7 - Percussion or Sing): Ignore a level of encumbrance…or just use mulepack cords.
   * (5/5) Spirit of the Horse* [3rd] (7 - Strings): Mass greater magic fang. Honestly, even though it counts 1 round per creature affected, this is still amazing if you have a few mounts within your team and no druid to spam this on them. Don’t have a pet? Then you can safely skip this.
   * (1/5) Stirring Discourse of the Mind [2nd] (4 - Oratory): Bonus to research and identifying items. Prrrobably not worth it. If you wanted to be good at knowledge and spellcraft, just take Pageant of the Peacock instead. Gives you the same bonuses, lasts longer, and is more generally applicable.
   * (2/5) Stone Face [3rd] (7 - Comedy or Oratory): It’s stone to flesh! How often do you need to (or want to) turn stone to flesh? Not often enough to need this as a performance I hope.
   * (5/5) Symphony of the Ascent [3rd] (7 - Percussion or Wind): Gain immunity to some really killer conditions. They may not come up much, but when someone throws out a hold person, it’ll feel REALLY GOOD to be able to say “hard pass” and just keep it moving. Can also being used for some weird spell shit but we will deal with that later.
   * (5/5) Symphony of the Dark Prince [5th] (15 - Sing): So the ability doesn't really specify who the target is? Like it doesn’t say one creature, all creatures, an item…so I’m just going to rate this as if you just cast reverse gravity. In that case, reverse gravity is good, no save, fairly large area of gravitational nonsense. Can be very good at turning someone who can’t inherently fly into a floating duck.
   * (5/5) ✰Symphony of the Elysian Heart✰ [3rd] (7 - Keyboard or Wind): Freedom of movement as a performance is still freedom of movement which is really good. It effects you and one ally per bard level…which is a lot of allies and it doesn’t even cost extra for that. This is amazing, yes you should probably have it.
   * (3/5) Tales of Twisting Steel (Act or Oratory): Is this a neat spell? Yes. Is it on our spell list? No. Do we want this? Not really! We aren’t a tank and we do not want to be damage sponging with the tank.
   * (4/5) The Bear's Jig [4th] (11 - String or Wind): So Its just the awaken spell um so i think you have to make a will save to get sir bearington. That said, pied piping some awakened animals can be super useful. Get a literal fly on the wall to help you out. Get the rats to dig up some dirt. Convince the tiger to fight its oppressors. Lots of fun that can be had here. The best part? Once you no longer need the informants, they literally go back to being dumb! It’s the perfect crime! Also affected by lingering performance if you care.
   * (4/5) The Canticle of Joy [3rd] (7 - Sing): Will save bestow curse at range is a very scary debuff. That really should be all I need to say.
   * (1/5) The Cat-Step [2nd] (5 - Dance): Or Hear me out… just cast featherfall. Featherfall just seems like a better idea than this. Don’t have it? Don’t worry there are several ways to get it.
   * (2/5) The Dance of 23 Steps [2nd] (4 - Dance): Dance of please do not hit me! It can be activated as a free action which is dope, and it only uses one round but it IS affected by performance duration extenders. So if you are making ranged attacks, and not so much casting spells, this can be a great way to get a good amount of dodge, especially if combined with combat expertise, but honestly, I’m not a huge fan when we could be getting ac from…Haste but better.
   * (3/5) The Dance of Kindled Desires [2nd] (5 - Dance): Devil's deal. So this is basically Geas, taking advantage of their deepest desires. Now you can make them do something suicidal, and they get a will save (with a +2 if it takes more than an hour) but its a very fun version of suggestion if you can pull it off.
   * (3/5) The Depths of the Mountain [5th] (15 - Percussion or Wind): Earthquake part 2, the shaking. Does er a lot of earthquake things with some extra boons. Basically only useful if you want to doom a town or make a fight hell and a handbasket, but this also doesn’t distinguish between friend or foe.
   * (1/5) The Dumbshow of Gorroc [2nd] (5 - Comedy or Act): So its a 10d6 reflex save…against plants or oozes. 5d6 against anything else. Nah.
   * (3/5) The House of the Imaginary Walls [4th] (10 - Act): Mime wall! Will save or you fall for the oldest trick in the book, and you have a protective wall that even works on ghosts! Plus, so long as you use a 10 by 10 foot square, you can just…put it anywhere! Make a bridge! Make some steps IDK. It’s a fun little mind puzzle that also can prevent people from getting to you but DOES not work on objects. Questionable on if it works on spells. Can be extended by lingering and others.
   * (3/5) The Lullaby of Ember the Ancient [3rd] (7 - Sing): Okay for this one I think they DO geta save and its basically just deep slumber, but supernatural which is good but not amazing because of the HD limits 
   * (1/5) The Quickening Pulse [3rd] (7 - Percussion or Wind): 1d6 damage per turn is bad even without a save.
   * (2/5) The Requiem of the Fallen Priest-King [3rd] (10 - Oratory or Sing): So you have to spend 1 minute and 5 performance rounds to be able to take 1 standard or move action as a swift action once with 10 minutes…or we could just wait and cast borrowed time. Not really worth it as a prebuff, even if its effect does seem cool.
   * (5/5) ✰The Rheumy Refrain✰ [2nd] (5 - Sing): So this is a will save or lose against non-casters. Why? Because concentration checks are a d20+caster level+bonus spell casting stat…which non casters do not have. So they basically have to roll a d20 vs 10+ your charisma modifier…which should be a lot. AND THAT'S TO DO ANYTHING besides make a SINGLE MELEE ATTACK or move up to their movement speed and NOT BOTH. This isn't mind effecting, this isn't an illusion, its just a will save. That is a hilarious amount of lock down, and its pretty cheap. Consider this your slumber I guess, because if you don't get them turn one…well then just start the performance again and make them roll another save!!!!!! THIS IS DUMB.
   * (3/5) The Sea Is Now My Sky [3rd] (10 - Sing or String): Gain a swim speed and bonus to swim checks. Uh…I mean when you need a swim speed this is great for you and your entire team but how often do you and your entire team need a swim speed?????
   * (4/5) The Tragedy of False Hope  [2nd] (4 - Oratory or Sing): Will save or become flat footed. This one happens to be mind effecting but that again just means you need to choose your targets well. Flat footed can be a REALLY strong ac debuff and also gets your friendly rogues and roguelikes sneak attack. Sandman bards, looking at you.
   * (5/5) ✰The Waning Bolero✰ [4th] (10 - Dance): SLOW BUT BETTER. Slow is one of the best debuffs in the game, everyone who can see you within 60 feet takes the hit and EVERY ROUND they have to roll aNOTHER will save or it gets WORSE. Moreover, once they fail a save, things can’t get better, only prevented from not getting worse for that one round. This is a hilariously powerful performance and god it probably shouldn’t exist.
   * (4/5) The Winds of the Five Heavens [4th] (10 - Act or Oratory): Spend 3 full round actions to get…well control winds. You basically have to long cast control winds…on the bright side…ITS CONTROL WINDS which is a TERRIFYING spell that can basically destroy a town if you let it. Not the best use in combat, but if you want it to be, its one HELL of an opener.
   * (2/5) Toccata and Fugue of the Danse Macabre [2nd] (4 - Keyboard or Wind): Hide from undead! How often do you need to hide from undead? If often, i guess this is good, but if that's the case, you probably don't want to be playing a bard. 
   * (4/5) Triple Time [1st] (3 - Percussion, String, or Wind): Longstrider, but a performance! It lasts an hour which should be plenty of time to take advantage of, and when you need it again, its pretty darn cheap.
   * (3/5) Vindictive Soliloquy [4th] (10 - Act, Oratory, or Sing): Another set up ability. Its a supernatural call lightning storm that uses sonic damage and you dont have to be outside to get the most out of it which is…actually fantastic. I’d love to rate it higher but that 5 round charge up is really holding it back.
   * (3/5) Wildsoul Aria [4th] (7 - Sing or Wind): Again, baleful polymorph? Great and fun spell. Beast shape? Also pretty good even if we are getting it a bit late. Still costs way too many rounds to start up, making it much harder to use in combat or even out of combat sometimes.
   * (4/5) Wise King’s Saga [5th] (15 - Oratory or Sing): Gives you commune, nothing really complicated about that but this is pretty late in the game…and I can’t help but remember that most improved familiars could also do this.
________________
