# Bardic Performances

Bardic Performances
For a number of rounds per day equal to 4+Cha+2*Lvl, you can perform any one of the performances that you know at that level (yes you get all of them.) You can only have one active at a time, and switching from one to another means stopping one to start the other, but any performance can be maintained as a free action each turn. 

At first level, you start it with a standard action, 7th a move action, 13th, swift action, and if it has an audible component, they have to be able to hear you, if it has visible components, they have to be able to see you. 


You get access to ALL performances at the appropriate level, so really this will be more of a review of what you can get out of them individually.


* (2/5) [Lv1] Countersong (Su): So if for some reason you are targeted by a NON SPELL (now this includes spell like abilities…) sound based attack , i.e. using music, speech, or otherwise, you can roll performance once each round, and anyone targeted may use your performance check for their save. Generally, your skills scale harder than your saves, and you should have at least ONE performance through the roof. Will you use this a lot? No. Will you love it when you need it? Absolutely.
* (2/5) [Lv1] Distraction (Su): Like countersong but for patterns and figment illusions. Will you need it often? Likely not. Will it be very helpful when you do? Probably yes.
* (3/5) [Lv1] Fascinate (Su): So let's get the hurdles out of the way. This is an audio-visual enchantment compulsion mind-affecting ability that automatically breaks in combat, or if the affected target see’s any obvious hostile action…including simply casting a spell. Not even a bad one. That still has a will save and if they pass it they can’t be affected for 24 hours. That’s…a lot to get past but not impossible. The best times to use it are as a distraction, enthralling groups of people for an ambush, OR as a means to set something else up. At its core, that's what it feels like it’s meant to be: a set up ability/utility ability. Meaning when you CAN capitalize on it, it’ll work wonders.
* (5/5) [Lv1] Inspire Courage (Su): HERE'S WHAT YOU'VE ALL BEEN WAITING FOR! Inspire courage, the world renown buff with…not great scaling. Seriously +4 at level 17 is kinda sad. That said, what it lacks in raw power, it makes up for in application. You see, EVERYONE who can either see or hear you (depending on which components you use) gets this bonus to attack, damage, and saves against charm and fear effects. Everyone. Meaning that the more people you have, the more useful this becomes, as everyone becomes a LITTLE bit more accurate. Investing in this ability gives back dividends and it’s no wonder that it became the bards staple! Just…don’t be disappointed if it doesn’t look amazing at first.
* (4/5) [Lv3] Inspire Competence (Su): ♫MMMMM DONT SUCK YEAH DONT-BE-BAD AT-THINGS… YOU CAN DO BETTER! DONT SUCK! ♬. 
Ahem that besides, it provides a pretty good scaling bonus and sometimes you need want your friend to pass a skill check real bad. Beats using Aid Another.
* (3/5) [Lv6] Suggestion (Sp): So this isn’t really its own performance but more an extension of fascinate. WHEN you have someone under the effects of Fascinate, you can then spend a standard action to give them a suggestion as per the spell (Will Save). This only effects one creature at a time but you can use it more than once and I don’t think it actually burns extra rounds, but you can talk to your DM about that. Remember that the effect of suggestion lasts an hour per level so…fascinate someone cute, get them to do your laundry and make out like a bandit.
* (4/5) [Lv8] Dirge of Doom (Su): Alright anyone you don’t like within 30ft of you that can see and hear you is shaken. No save. No question. Just shaken so long as you continue the performance and they can be shaken. It’s a nice little penalty to saves, and its wide reaching, but isn’t that potent on its own. Let's call it “Inspire Fear.”
* (3/5) [Lv9] Inspire Greatness (Su): so give a select few people…wow this this going to be a doozy, +2 bonus HIT DICE (as D10s), temp HP to go with the hit dice (so roll HP as 2*(d10+Con)), a +2 to attack AND +1 to fort saves. Moreover, those HD count for HD dependent spells…which obviously can get silly if used appropriately. Very fun to use on clerics or against pattern masters. Also don’t be afraid to er…bard cycle to keep getting that fresh temp hp. Also scales hilariously well with investment, making it a great candidate for Master Performer and Grandmaster Performer which brings this up from okay to fantastic
* (4/5) [Lv12] Soothing Performance (Su): Spend 4 rounds of performance for mass cure serious wounds wounds. One less spell we have to take, and rad out of combat healing is rad.
* (4/5) [Lv14] Frightening Tune (Sp): Hilariously enough, not labeled as a mind affecting ability. Every enemy within 30 feet of your makes a will save, or they are frightened and have to run away…which basically ends fights before they start if it works. Sure, if they succeed, they are immune but really you can use this to just…keep people away so long as they can hear your HAUNTING MELODY. That said, remember…this is an SP ability…meaning that spell resistance CAN stop it. Which is annoying but…well this is the price for sick power.
* (3/5) [Lv15] Inspire Heroics (Su): So the biggest issue is that this targets effectively 1 person (yes i know it scales but we are at level 15 and it doesnt scale until 18). Now, usually this would kill it, especially since its bonuses are good but not mind bending. Goes down a rating if its the only performance you are using that round.That said, at level 15, you should be dual wielding performances using Shadow Bard or Virtuoso Performance, meaning this isn’t the worst thing you could use as a follow up. 
* (3/5) [Lv18] Mass Suggestion (Sp): Like suggestion, but mass! That said, at level 18, things are very different. Even the weakest enemies we will fight tend to have okay to really good will saves, and you have to fail two saves just to get this to work! It’s not impossible, but it’ll be much more difficult to take advantage of at this level.
* (4/5) [Lv20] Deadly Performance (Su): Continuous will save or die. Every round you can basically target a creature with a mind-effecting will save, so long as they can see and hear you until the beginning of your next turn and you don’t get stopped. If they fail their save, they die. If they succeed, they are staggered. Really no good way to do this…and again…you should be dual wielding performances by now. Have fun making your team super heroes while dropping rifts so nasty it sends people to hell.
