# 5th Level Spells

5th Level Spells
	Control
	                        * Wall of Stone: Create a wall...or a bridge...or a ramp or a staircase doesn’t really matter, just so long as you connect it to other stone. This is an instantaneous creation effect, so that wall is just...THERE now and has motherfucker defenses, so it can’t be dispelled or anything because that real rock. Great control spell on its own, but this, along with stone shape is how you get to build a castle for free :3 Happy Crafting!
                        * Wall of Force: Wall of fuck off and don’t try. Spells can’t pass through, breath attacks, nothing. You wanna hit it? Fine but it has DR/30 fuck you. It’s immune to dispel magic and honestly is just a huge problem for anyone who gets caught on the other side. Effectively, this is how you decide you are only going to fight half of the army. Just watch out for disintegrate!
                        * Roaming Pit: Create pit, but now, it plays tag!!! This is a great way to just start scooping up the ground army and force them all into one spot so you can turn this into a fish in a barrel sort of situation.
                        * Cloudkill (also Debuff): Aka cloud of con damage. Works as fog cloud (remember ashen path) but just sort of floats away from you slowly fucking up people’s lives. This can hilarously roll through entire armies but because it moves without control, I wouldn’t rely on it as a killing implement.
	Buff
	                        * Polymorph (w/ Emergency Attunement): Ever wanted all of the transformations? It isn’t particularly powerful but it doesn’t really need to be as it gives you access to whatever you need, whenever you need it. MOREOVER if you take Emergency attunement, you can turn this spell into Lesser Shapechange. Remember, our goal with spell selection is to cover as many bases as possible with the fewest number of spells known.
                        * Elemental Body II: More stat boosts and movement options!!!!
                        * Mask From Divination: If they thought they saw you? They didn’t. This shields you from scrying eyes, which is meh, but the more interesting effect is that individuals who could see through your spells now have to make a caster level check against you. If they fail, then even true-seeing can’t see through your invisibility...and that’s poggers.
                        * Thoughtsense: Get blindsight 60 feet, and be a problem when the DM tries to sneak up on you. IT doesn’t have that long of a duration, so just make sure you bap yourself before the fight.
	Debuff
	                        * Feeblemind: OH fuck. Um...fuck….like fuck okay Will Save (w/ SR). Are you able to cast arcane spells? You get a -4 to the save. Did you fail? Your int and charisma are set to 1...permanently. That’s right. It doesn’t matter how high it was...it’s 1 now. Like if you get hit with this you are just...done. Like done done like I...fuck this HURTS and is TERRIFYING.
                        * Hold Monster: Hold person, but now you can paralyze whoever! Remember, a paralyzed creature is helpless, so it can be coup-de-grace’d and hyper murdered at your leisure.
                        * Icy Prison: Reflex save (w/ SR) or become helpless as you immediately get just….turned into an iceblock. Since it’s ice I’d argue it doesn’t block line of sight but Jesus this is a scary spell. You can’t make another save to get out, you have to make a strength check which uh...depending on who you bap with this...is just not gonna happen.
                        * Suffocation: Alright, point to a creature. Fort save (w/ SR) or for the next three rounds, you are either staggered, suffocating, unconscious, or dead. It’s really really mean.
                        * Wrecking Ray (w/ Maximize Spell): Feeblemind but this time fuck fighters. Ranged touch attack and then 1d4 points of Dexerity and Strength damage per 3 caster levels...which means at this level thats 3d4 of each. Maximize this spell and basically turn the tarrasque into an oversized puppy. Oh and you can make a fort save….for half damage ohohohohoho.
                        * Baleful Polymorph: Fort save (w/ SR) or become a newt, as Beast Shape III. Now they also get to make a will save….and if they fail that, thats when the REAL damage comes in when you basically strip them of their class features. It’s a shame that happens second….
                        * Phantasmal Web: MINDDDDD WEB. Will save (w/ SR) or be affected by the web spell, just you, and whoever else failed, everyone else is fine. Also every round, make a fort save. If you fail, you are nauseated!!! HA this is just funny. It’s literally the “spiders all over me” hallucination.
                        * Mind Fog: ...Damn...okay you drop a wave of like...okay look is like DMT. Will save (w/ SR), while in the fog. They fail???? They now take a WHOOPING -10 TO ALL WISDOM CHECKS AND WILL SAVES which basically means that whatever you hit them with next WILL ruin them. Amazing set up spell, really fucked up.
	Blast
	                        * Cone of Cold: Simple ice blast. Large cone, reflex save (w/ SR) for 1d6 cold damage per caster level.
                        * Iluzry Note: Hey for anyone who is trying to do big damage with your spells and be the best sort of blaster? You don’t actually need or want a lot of blast spells. In fact, at this level, and going forward, it’s generally more productive to put metamagic on your lower level blast spells and give them powerful rider effects, than it is to get just...more dice. Just...something to consider, okay?
	Summons
	                        * Army Across Time: Read This and have fun. Buy a ring of Tactical Precision and take Allied Spellcaster with the fools for friends trait. Now throw your caster level through the roof and destroy the world because you are god I guess.
                        * Summon Monster V: HEYYY we got some serious firepower this time around! The Babau, Dire Lion, and Azata are ALLLL great pickups. 
                        * Planar Binding, Lesser: The first, final and most glorious spell in our path to planar domination. Planar binding. Though we may only call upon lesser spirits for now...this is the beginning of our ascension. All dramatics aside this is a WICKED powerful spell because it involves the true calling of outsiders. Unlike normal summoning, which basically makes a shadow clone, this calls an aCTUAL planar being into your existence, with all of its powers, abilities and directives completely intact. This makes this spell immediately WILDLY powerful as it’s only limited by HD...and also incredibly dangerous. 

So how do we get the most out of this absurd spell? Well we need to follow the rules. Hopefully, by now, you’ve recovered the other two pieces of Three Pillars of Planar Domination because here’s when we need them. First? Set up your Magic Circle...preferably in a place where you can set up defenses and have the advantage. This will take a hell of a long time, but it’ll keep the outsider from capping you on sight. Second? Imbue said circle with Dimensional anchor. This will more or less force whatever poor soul you call to deal with you, as they can’t teleport away. Now...they still have SR. But..after that it comes down to a Charisma check. Yes that's right. The things we are fucking steallar at. This is why, despite getting it later, sorcerer’s can make AMAZING outsider callers. For more in-depth notes, read  DMDM's Guide To Planar Binding and Crowdsourced Guide to Planar Binding

Now this is...a hell of a spell. If you intend to take it...which I’m not saying you shouldn’t...PLEASE talk to your dm. PLEASE. This can either be the coolest thing in the world and let you have a army of angels ooor can fuck an entire campaign because no one was ready for you to drop an actual real ice devil in the middle of the battle field. Just...be nice okay? I’m not saying you have to sacrifice your own fun, but It’s just easier if everyone is on-board.
                        * Khain’s Army: Lmao okay this one is just a fun spell uh you summon 1d4 ghouls and a ghast commander who do what you say! Ghouls paralyze people good, and can be fun for that if nothing else. 
	Utility
	                           * Teleport: Alright movement is no longer a problem. IF the wizard has this, you don’t need to, but if they don’t you do, because it literally just removes so many problems by just existing.
                           * Dominate Person: Will Save (w/ SR). They fail? You now own this person. Yes that is a fucked sentence but thats basically it. You only have to spend a single round concentrating on the spell each day to deny them a save, you really just have to keep them from doing anything “obviously against their nature” or “incredibly harmful” which is a lot. Also someone can willingly fail a will save….so you might just be able to smack someone with charm person while they are mind fucked and have them forever! 
                           * Possession (also Protection): Do you know what’s better than owning a person? Stealing that person’s life entirely. As far as I can tell, Possession is just a BETTER magic jar. You get their HP, their physical scores and any passive abilities they may have and you can rock this pet body for hours per level...meaning that  you can just hire some really buff adventurer to be your meat suit for the day, or take that really annoying monster that you just smacked full of Debuffs. This can obviously get cheesy but like...come on this is a fucking FUN spell.
                           * ✰Shadow Evocation✰: Access to EVERY evocation spell of 4th or lower. Remember this isn’t only blasting spells? This is control spells like Resilient sphere, and some buff spells and just...a whole mess of great great options. Amazing, spell, gives us a ridiculous amount of options, yes yes yes yes yes yes gold fucking star.
                           * Prying Eyes: YAY MORE SPYING SPELLS. KNOWING THINGS IS ALWAYS USEFUL. Look I know I rated this ⅘ but I’d take it because its just so fucking cool to have your own personal mini spy network. AAHHH.
                           * Fabricate: “Water: 35 liters, Carbon: 20 kg, Ammonia: 4 liters, Lime:1.5 kg, Phosphrus: 800 g, salt: 250g, saltpeter:100g, Sulfer: 80g, Fluorine: 7.5 g, iron: 5.6 g, Silicon: 3g, and 15 other elements in small quantities.... thats the total chemical makeup of the average adult body. Modern science knows all of this, but there has never been a single example of succesful human trasmutation. It's like there's some missing ingredient..... Scientists have been trying to find it for hundreds of years, pouring tons of money into research, and to this day they don't have a theory. For that matter, the elements found in a human being is all junk that you can buy in any market with a child's allowence. Humans are pretty cheaply made.”
                           * Telekinesis: Having the force is tight!!! Has a wide variety of uses and can generally just be a really really fun spell. Nothing game breaking but definitely worth enjoying.
                           * Create Mindscape: This is the Penultimate Genjutsu. Will save (w/ SR). If they fail they are in a mind realm of your own creation, entirely of your own design. It can be either overt, in which your victim actively knows its an illusion but still has to deal with it. You TECHNICALLY have to make a means of escape but….you can make this literally as difficult and confusing as possible. If you make it veiled they think its a real place, but can make a will save as they interact with the world. Now...you also can’t act but this is a fucking AMAZING spell. Do you wanna give a noble the time of their life? Hit someone with literal Inception? Just take a guy out of the fight while he has to fight his inner demons made real???? We love it all. Moreover, if you have mindscape door, you can throw your allies into this realm, who now can beat the shit out of whoever is stuck in your cost doom realm.
                           * Scripted Hallucination: AN ILLUSION WITH AI. We absolutely love that. Has a script, as settings, and can intelligently react to the way people act upon it. This is fucking glorious and the only reason i dont rate it higher is because well, you’ve probably already taken at least one of these.
                           * Mirage Arcana (also Control): Cover a massive area in an illusion creating the world of your dreams! Also includes tactile elements, unlike most figment spells, so enjoy dropping your reality marble on a situation. This is basically a MASSIVE battlefield control spell, as you warp the world around you to your whims.
                           * Telepathic Bond: ...This one has such a fucking weird material component. Anyway, you want this because telepathy means that you can have all of those OOC plans IC, act silently and update one another in weird and crazy ways that I think are super cool. Awesome utility spell.
	Protection
	                           * Stoneskin, Communal: Still expensive, but now you have defense for the whole team! Yay!!!
	5th Lvl Alt Sources
	                           * Permanency (scroll): Make a spell last forever! This costs a fair bit of money which means we don’t want to be doing this every day, but getting some low level buffs with duration forever can be amazing! Just make sure they don’t get dispelled!
                           * Break Enchantment (scroll): Occasionally, the DM will get you or one of your teammates with some serious shit. If its a heavy curse, and you don’t have access to the Heal spell, for a scary number of effects, its either this, or wish...so you’d better have this on hand.
                           * Major Creation (scroll): Create a thing! Can definitely be cheesed, but unless you plan on doing some wild Looney Toons trickery, this can be skipped.
                           * Mages Private Sanctum (scroll): New fun house spell, now with an even cooler house! When you need a cool house, cast cool house!
                           * Secret Chest (scroll): Do you need to hide things incredibly well? Here is how you do it. Give it to the Wizard to hide their spellbook.
                           * Hammer of Mending (scroll): AOE Make Whole fixes lots of things! A bit costly with that mithral hammer but ya know we like that.
                           * Sending (scroll): Sometimes you need to communicate with homies far away. This is one of the best ways to do it strangely enough.
                           * Planar Adaptation (scroll): Okay around this level you and your team will start getting involved in planar nonsense. This will save you from fucking dying on some planes, so when you need it, YOU NEED IT.
                           * Astral Projection, Lesser (scroll/versatile spoenaeity): This costs 1000gp per casting...so obviously you can’t do it all of the time...BUT it does give you and your party a get of of jail free card with death, and it lasts until you decide for it not to so like….10000% worth it. The ONLY reason I say you shouldn’t pick it up as a spell known is because it is SO good and SO long lasting that you literally just don’t need to.
	________________
