# 7th Level Spells

7th Level Spells
	Control
	                                       * Forcecage: Greater Resilient Sphere. Reflex Save, SR no! They fail? They get put in the no fun box. You can teleport out, but you can’t using blink or any ethereal nonsense to walk through. It’s not complex, but the mere fact that its a reflex and has no SR makes it a great pick.
                                       * Hungry Darkness (also Debuff): Deeper Darkness, but worse! If you begin your turn in the darkness, you take 3d6 force damage (which is almost never resisted) and 2 Con damage (which can really really hurt). SR can be applied to the damage but the darkness still functions, so it’s good for  having a continuous large scale problem.
                                       * Reverse Gravity: Anything that can’t fly (which isn’t much…) is now yeeted as gravity gets flipped, with no save, or SR because you are fucking with gravity. Great way to deal with mooks and have them be set up for insta murder.
                                       * Grasping Hand (also Protection): Hand of fuck off, no, and fuck you! While CMD rises like a MF in late game, this can be used to give you cover and defense, grappling or repositioning of enemies each turn, making it a variable defensive tool. Great spell, great options….does have SR though.
	Buff
	                                       * ✰Polymorph, Greater (w/ Emergency Attunement)✰: Remember all of those forms from last level that I said were really good and worth picking up? CONGRATS. NOW YOU HAVE ALL OF THEM. YEAH. IN ONE SPELL. Meaning that yes, if you can, you should totally wait to get this spell the level after and honestly have every reason to take it. Now have whatever buff you want at the drop of a hat. Breath weapon? Movement Type? 

With Emergency Attunement this only gets MORE nutty, as you are able to have basically Shapechange, swapping your forms as you please!!! Need the dragons flyspeed to get up on the enemy and then to get a chimera’s breath attack? Sure it eats up your action economy, but having options is ALWAYS helpful.
                                       * Form of the Dragon II: Like Form of the Dragon one butttt….*Inhales* Large Size, +6 bonus to Strength, 90ft fly speed, +4 Con, +6 natural armor, and 2 use 8d8 Breath Weapon that now can either be a 40ft cone or 80ft line. Great bonuses! Good form! Can it compete with the godlike versatility of Greater Polymorph???? Ehhh…..up to you.
                                       * Form of The Exotic Dragon II (also Blast/Protection): As Above but with access to Primal Dragons. It also doesn’t get a second use of it’s breathe weapon.
                                       * Form of The Alien Dragon II (also Blast/Protection): As Above but with access to Esoteric Dragons. Your breathe weapon also stays at 6d8 and you don’t get a second use...jeez. 
                                       * Magical Beast Shape: Become an even more insanely potent magical beast!!!! Problem being that you can ONLY assume the form of a magical beast. This isn’t to say magical beasts aren’t amazing, and getting access to huge and diminutive is great Buuuuuut its still losing a vast array of options.
                                       * Elemental Body IV: Big bonuses get bigger! Again, great spell...but you can get elemental body III and like 5 other spells with greater polymorph...
                                       * Arcane Sight, Greater: Ultimate Detect Magic! Now when you look at people you just know what they are working with from the jump. Also known as Analyze Dweomer with less chance for saves!!! IF you got that spell before, you don’t need to get this, BUT if you didn’t...well this is just that but better! Woo! Knowing things is always useful.
                                       * ✰Boosted (Selected) Boosted Borrow Future (Experimental Wordcaster)✰: *Deep Breath* DM I’d like to give my entire team an extra turn in exchange for a 7th level spell-slot and the fact that they will be staggered next round? What? What happens if using my vast magical power to choose teammates, companions, or individuals who are immune to staggered or don’t care? OH….well then everyone just gets an extra turn because I say so….uh...yeah so I guess we just win this fight yeah? See you next session.
                                       * Legendary Proportions: I summon the power of the MYSTIC MUNGUS FOR MAXIMUM ENBIGGENATION!!!!! +6 Str, +4 Con, +6 Natural Armor, DR10/ADAMANTINE and you go up one size category. This is uh...well this is when your fighter finally gets tired of enlarge person...and wants to try something more...fitting. Enjoy crushing towers my dude.
	Debuff
	                                          * Waves of Exhaustion: Okay...point a 60 foot cone at people...do they have SR? Roll SR. Did you succeed? Great, they are exhausted with no save...and like the only way to cure exhaustion is to take a long rest so thats just a wide range tactical -6 to STR and DEX that might as well be permanent for any combat situation.
                                          * Insanity: Bap someone. Will Save (w/ SR). They fail and you succeed? They are confused...forever.
                                          * Crime Wave: Okay this one is just...fun look, it’s not always optimal but its fucking hilarous AND it CAN be useful. Will Save (w/ SR) on a bunch of creatures. They fail??? They are now obligate thieves, burglars, and murderers.
                                          * Mass Hold Person: Okay so this is a bunch of will saves all with SR but ya know, if SR isn’t involved it becomes just MASS HYPER PARALYZE. This one BARRELY makes the list mainly because of the fact that you get a much higher DC due to its level.
                                          * Resounding Word (Also Blast): So this one is easy. It last for 3 rounds and each round, the character rolls a fort save. The  spell has SR, but they only have to roll that once to be under the effects. Anyway, if they fail the first one, they are staggered and take some baby sonic damage. Fail the second save? Stunned for one round. Third round? Stunned for 1d4+1 rounds. Amazing spell to using persistent metamagic on, but the real benefit is that it has medium range, so you can just set it on someone and let them deal with that problem.
	Blast
	                                          * Caustic Eruption: HUKA PELE!!! Now the shame of this is centered around you Buuuut reflex save or everyone around you takes 1d6 damaged per CL (max 20d6) annnnd NO SR! Wooo!!! Pretty good damage, acid is rarely resisted, and it does good damage! Again, if this wasn’t centered around you? It’d be perfect. 
                                          * Finger of Death: Point to one person...and Fort Save with SR. They fail and you succeed? You deal 10 damage per CL flat. This….cannnn hurt buuuuuut SR sucks and Fort save is usually the highest...So no promises.
	Summons
	                                          * Summon Monster VII: SO this is where we get our best bruiser in the T FUCKING REX….and is probably the last time we will have a Summon Monster spell that’s super mega worth it. At this point, you can bind and summon whatever else you need so everything beyond this is like...just gravy I guess. Just assume every higher level summon monster is an excuse to summon more lower monsters at this point.
	Utility
	                                          * ✰Project Image (also Protection)✰: HAHA THE NEWEST IN SCUMBAG CASTER TECHNOLOGY. Technically a shadow spell, which really only proves shadow supremacy furthermore, but basically, it makes an illusory version of you...that you can SEE AND CAN CAST SPELLS THROUGH. Its baseline mimics you unless you tell it to do something different as a move action. This can be used to artificially increase the range of your spells (did I hear greater spectral hand???) and be used for all sorts of fucking trickery! Also, the only spells you can cast are...illusion spells...DID I HEAR INVISIBLE SHADOWCLONE BULLSHIT???? DID I HEAR SHADOW SPELL STACKING???????????????????????
                                          * Greater Teleport: Teleport with no range cap...at all. Technically could go to other planets if you wanted. No changes of mishaps just...you go there! Again, if you have a prepared friend who has this, you don’t need it...but you’ll want it...and if they don't have it thennnn you should take it.
                                          * ✰Shadow Conjuration, Greater✰: EVERY SUMMONING AND CREATION CONJURATION SPELL OF 6TH OR LOWER. Just...check how many of the amazing spells are conjuration nonsense? This is amazing and you should love it, cherish it and hold it tight in your arms, as you realise you have access to a bunch of standard action summons, and amazing wall spells.
                                          * Banishment: Send them back from whence they came! It’s a will save (W/ SR) but if it works, outsiders are just...removed from the fight entirely.
                                          * Control Weather: Massive fuckstorm. Now...this requires prep...but like….you can use this to have clear skies, or bring down walls of rain and basically well...this is the play god spell. You will always find ways to use it but its really just to play god.
                                          * ✰Create Mindscape, Greater✰ (Also Control): “It is finally time...for us to unleash  power that cannot be fathomed by beings who have not been touched by the veil. We only need to give form to the realm within our minds...and so we say...Unlimited Mageworks!”

Okay, me being a weeb aside, okay its a will save (w/ SR) but if they fail they are in your reality marble. Obviously, in combat, this means that you can bring them into a world of your creation, along with your teammates, to just...have absolutely and complete battlefield control. But let's not think about combat right now. No, I'm serious.

What about having the BEST mansion for your teammates as you and your squad nap in your hyper mind palace? How about having an ultra secure location to do research or whatever else you need on the fly? Like...the amount of things you can do with this are INSANE because this is a REAL PHYSICAL PLACE!!! Forged from your mind!!!! It is easily one of my favorite and coolest spells and just...god I fucking love this. 
                                          * Temporal Divergence: Be Coil, from Worm. Cast this as a swift action and then choose which of two diverging options you want to happen. Good if  you have horrible indecision. Using it more than once involves a pretty serious Will Save!
                                          * Deflection (also blast): So if someone misses you...fair and square, their attack VS your ac...then you can send the attack back at them...that said...most of your defense comes from your crazy protection spells which SOMETIMES AC boosting via buffs but like...a lot of the time comes from miss chance! Sooo...up to how you build.
                                          * Mage’s Magnificent Mansion: Look...if your DM doesn’t like the idea of having a Create Demiplane sick mind palace that allows you to rest because your body is like sleep, then like...you deserve this at this level. If one of your party members doesn’t have this, you can take it….buuuut you deserve the perfect mind palace.
                                          * Scrying, Greater: Get more information, with a higher DC, for longer. When you’ve gotta be someone’s NSA agent, this is a good way to do it. Remember that it is a Will Save (w/ SR). Knowing things is always useful.
                                          * Walk Through Space: Teleport step! By now this is mainly a way to get pass AoO’s and such but it’s also super cool and I’m sure you already know by now that STYLE POINTS ALWAYS COUNT.
	Protection
	                                             * Hostile Juxtaposition, Greater: Will save (w/ SR). They fail? These targets become your body doubles. If you are every targeted by a damaging spell or attack, you can swap spaces with an enemy as an Immediate action. The spell ends once you discharge it each time, but like...this is basically everything deflection wants to be but way better. Get rekt’d by the Flying Raijin Tech.
                                             * Subjective Reality: So choose one person, object or force...no save, no SR and im 90% the mind effecting is just on you.  You basically do incorporeal rules. Neither of your non-magical abilities work on eachother, you can’t cast spells on them. You are immune to any Sonic, scent, or language dependent abilities and they are muted to you and made transparent. It’s Inazagi. Just...trust me.
	7th Lvl Alt Sources
	                                             * Plane Shift (scroll): Okay so the clerics could visit their gods like 5 levels ago, so its a bit late, but you need this to do your cosmic realmwalker adventures. You aren’t going to be doing this very often though, so don’t worry too much. Just watch out for this Nicol Bolas guy? Apparently he’s bad news and not worth the loot.
                                             * Limited Wish (scroll): Cast all of the spells but at the cost of expensive. It breaks curses, is infinitely versatile and incredibly expensive. Enjoy the anyspell when you can have it.
                                             * Simulacrum (scroll): Create any monster in the game as your loyal servant. Even if it only has half of its actual HD...most abilities aren’t HD dependent. Craft a solar that still casts like a level 20 cleric, with an army of still VERY impressive SLA’s. This is one of your tree ways of easily breaking reality, after Planar Binding and Trompe L'oeil Paintings.
                                             * Create Demiplane, Lesser (scroll): Create your own permanent realm!!! Honestly, the ultimate permanent base set up, and quarters and if you can afford it, will obviously allow you to do some nutty things...but it’s super expensive. This version of the spell is much better for expanding the space than building it.
                                             * Recorporeal Incarnation (scroll): WEAR PEOPLE’S SKIIIIIIIIIIIINNNNNNNNN WHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYY okay okay okay okay woo okay well okay so like….you can get whatever immunities of the corpse you jsut robbed and it’s SR which can be really good because this lasts weeks per level, and it really wants you to impersonate people corpse clone style but like...FUCCCKKKKKK this is creepy as hell. Ah!!!
                                             * Control Undead (scroll): When you need to control even more undead, this is another spell to do exactly that! Necromancers, this is for you. Everyone else? Pass.
                                             * Mass Planar Adaptation (scroll): Cheaper than the one per one version and helps everyone stay safer longer! Yay!!!!
	________________
