# 3rd Level Spells

3rd Level Spells
	Control
	               * Aqueous Orb (also Blast): The yoink orb. This spell is hilarious because it basically rolls over people, and if they fail their reflex save, get yeeted into the orb and have to hold their breath, making it both a HILAROUS Way to shut down casters, but also just a really funny sight. Also don’t forget, it’s limited by size, not HD, so if that efreeti is being a pain in the ass, just throw him into the washing machine.
               * Sleet Storm: No one can see shit, and they move half as fast. Great movement control, especially for less dexterious characters, and it has no SR, so this will be useful for a LONG time....Also Ashen Path might be able to see through it.
               * Wind Wall: Haha fuck your ranged attack, also WIND TUNNEEEL.
               * Shifting Sand: Moving quicksand!!! Really funny because if someone fails their save, you can move them too, no save. Great forced repositioning tool, great control spell.
               * Chains of Perdition: Chain of so many god damn combat maneuvers. Also, we have a lot of “move actions also move the spell” tricks this level, which means we should probably get a mount...OH RIGHT we should already be able to summon one. ANYWAY, if you wanna be an ABSOLUTE nuisance, this is a great way to do it.
               * Stinking Cloud (also Debuff): Okay once you shut up the 4 year old in your brain giggling about the fart cloud of doom, you realise that this is the OTHER ungodly debuff. SR no poison fog cloud that blocks line of sight (but not for us because we have ashen path, fuck you) and fort save or be NAUESATED...which is a HORRIFIC debuff. Nauseated creatures cannot take standard actions, only move actions, and there aren’t many ways to cure it! Sure if they are immune to poison, they are immune to the effect but then its STILL a cloud spell...which lets it block casting line of sight, makes archers blind, and generally is a pain to deal with. FUCK. Yes. Fart Cloud Rules (ehehehe...fart)
               * Spiked Pit (also Blast)(w/ Cherry Blossom Spell): Hey it’s create pit, but spiked!!!! The pit is deeper, and now, every second they climb out they get stabbed. Have fucking knocking them back into the spikes of doom! Also...if combined with Cherry Blossom spell, a character can build up an ungodly amount of ability damage. Remember, they only get a save IF the spell doesn’t have any save of its own, not specifically a save to mitigate the damage ;)
	Buff
	               * ✰Haste✰: Our first gold star spell of this level, haste is...hilariously overtuned. Instead of assuming you know why, let's dive in. First of all it effects 1 creature per level, and at this level, that’s 6 creatures...which is your entire party. So great. What do they get?

+1 to attack rolls (oh thats neat i guess…), +1 dodge bonus to ac (oh i mean meh but like nice), +1 to reflex saves (oh okay cool), +30 to ALL MOVEMENT SPEED (Jesus fuck oka-) WHEN MAKING A FULL ATTACK YOU CAN MAKE AN EXTRA ATTACK AT FULL BAB BONUS. At this level, the fighter has 2 attacks in a full attack...this gives him a third. That’s a potential 50% increase in DPR...and you can drop this on your entire team. This is THE combat buff, and while the wizard CAN have it, you SHOULD have it because you will ALWAYS USE IT, from now until level 20.
               * Fly: Sigh...okay this is the second gold star spell of this level. In fact, this spell is sooo fucking good that the other casters on your team have probably already taken it so you don’t have to. Being able to fight, move and interact in 3 dimensions is so game changing that pathfinder more or less expects EVERYONE to be able to fly around level 7. Meaning that if you don’t have anyone on your team that can cast fly….you need to be able to cast fly. With this, rivers are no longer a problem, you dont have to climb towers, or be blocked by walls, you can attack and defend from new angles like...it’s incredibly versatile and lasts for minutes per level with a 60 ft fly speed which is insane.

THAT SAID…if you have someone in your party that already took fly AND you took Floating Disk with Magic Trick at level one...you don't NEED it...just so long as SOMEONE has it.
               * Arcane Sight: Greater detect magic! You detect magic constantly and also can get more information from auras. Can be an amazingly informative spell in the hands of a good DM.
               * Heroism: It isn’t nearly as potent as haste but getting +2 to attack and saves for 10 minutes per level is an insanely long bonus, which makes it great for pre-buffing as the morale bonus stacks with basically everything else.
               * Contagious Zeal: Heroism but with a shorter duration, the morale bonuses are to attack and damage and every round you get to choose someone else to be heroic. Also known as “Lesser Inspire Courage”
               * Paragon Surge (Half-Elf Only) (w/ Emergency Attunement): So on it’s own I think paragon surge is one of the few spells that actually can keep up with Haste and Fly...this spell has received a lot of controversy but I think it’s about their level...on its own. You see, because of this faq, it basically lets you get 1 temporary feat, which while incredibly versatile, isn’t like...entirely game breaking in my opinion. Sure you can use it to get new spells buuuut you are stuck with them for the day, which doesn’t see much more broken then ya know...normal prepared casters...and you don’t even get them all day, only when you cast the spell. Again...amazing spell….don’t think its too bad on its own…

That SAID….once you include Emergency Attunement...this becomes a different matter entirely. Being able to have a feat on shuffle is INSANELY powerful, and makes this your go to 3rd level buff in EVERY situation, making it the second godly spell we’ve seen so far!!!
	Debuff
	                  * Slow: Alright….entire enemy team? Save or be staggered for the entirety of combat by fuckoff time magic. Also have your movement HALVED. This? This is one of the best debuffs in the game.
                  * Heatstroke: Ray of Exhaustion, but if targets are wearing heavy armor, they get a -4 to their save. As a reminder, Exhaustion gives a person -6 to their Strength and Dex...basically ruining most martials. Youch.
                  * Irradiate: Scaling AOE Con Drain...also since it’s instantaneous….and a creation spell I think like...you just chernobyl an area. It’s just sorta fucked now????
                  * Hold Person: You point to a humanoid and decide they should not be allowed to do things. They must then save or have their action economy taken away by the fun time police. They can spend a full round trying to plead their case, but that wastes their time which is rule 1 of being a shitlord debuffer.
                  * Excruciating Deformation: This spell is sorta fucked up. Bap someone with the spell (from a range because you took spectral hand right?), and they take Dex and Con damage, along with some nonlethal. Every round that being can make a fort save...to RESIST the effects for THAT ROUND. Meaning so long as you get the bap, this is something they have to deal with and every round they fail, they take con damage, making it harder to pass the next rounds. OOUUUCCCH.
	Blast
	                  * Fireball: Fireball. The ultimate in caster technology THE ICONIC SPELL. Only fireball. Just fireball. Always fireball. So long as there are casters in DND, this spell will exist...buuuuut why is it good? Does it do amazing damage? Not particularly, it’s not bad but not groundbreaking. Does it have HORRIBLE status effects? Nope just hurts. Immune to Spell resistance or Energy resistance? No actually both of those hurt a lot, especially since it’s fire damage. So what makes THIS spell so good?

Well because it does everything...well. It is average in everything it does which makes it an EXCELLENT foundation to build from. It has an INSANE range, It’s low enough level to add metamagic, does enough damage that boosting that damage doesn’t feel useless, affects a wide-ish area so if you want to add debuffing metamagic, like the INFAMOUS dazing spell, it’s great. It targets Reflex, which is a save most monsters aren’t great at, and because people love it so much, there is a lot of content to support it, like Magic Trick. Fireball isn’t just a good spell because it’s effects blow other spells out of the water. What makes fireball good is that it can grow with you, and STAY devastating in ways that make it harder for other blast spells to keep up, just because again, it has such a SOLID mechanical foundation.
                  * Lightning Bolt: Fireballs lanky brother! It also targets reflex and is ELECTRICITY damage, which is resisted far less often. The only reason that this spell tends to lose out to fireball is that monsters are rarely standing in a line that you can take advantage of, BUT it’s a great way to snipe multiple targets across a battlefield, and do some pretty nice damage while you are at it!!!!
                  * Battering Blast (also Control): Bull rushing bashing bowling balls batman!!! Another oddly scaling spell. While it can do some nice force damage, which is rarely resisted, the real gold point here is using it as both a blasting AND forced repositioning tool.

Important note though...it doesn’t have a CAP. So if you were to somehow...I dunno, get an insanely high caster level? You could do some absolutely ludicrous damage with this, more than possibly any other blasting spell.
	Summons
	                     * Summon Monster III: This is where summoning sorta starts to pop off and become something tremendous. Want a mount that can fly and scope out invisible enemies? Direbat. Monster has super high ac? Throw out a lantern archon with touch attack lazers.
                     * Phantom Steed: Summon scaling super horse! I told you I could get you a better mount. As you level up, your (incredibly fast) mount of choice gets even more movement options, all the way to being able to fly under its own power while you ride to victory at the speed of sound.
                     * Mad Monkeys: This spell is….fucking funny, I’m NGL, you literally just drop a barrel of monkeys on the enemy, and now every round they have to save against Distraction (which is nauseated), hope they dont get their shit stolen, take damage, and generally just have he absolute worst time. Combine with a pit spell to create the ball pit of doom, and revel in the screeching madness.
                     * ✰Undeath (Experimental Wordcaster)✰: All of the benefits of animate dead, far fewer of the shortcomings. As a standard action, from a range, raise up an undead horde for free. This spells is MANDATORY for Necromancers, just fantastic for anyone else who doesn't mind.
	Utility
	                     * Dispel Magic (also Debuff): Wow okay. So remember how I just described like a BUNCH of spells and how good they are? Crazy thing...the enemy can have spells too! Well we can’t have that. All jokes aside, dispel magic is a keystone to any casters build, as it lets you remove debuffs, weaken items, remove buffs, and all around smack anyone you don’t like with the no fun button. You WILL feel it if you don’t have this spell.
                     * Major Image: Create an audio, visual, smell and sensory illusion that everyone can see. Great for distractions, hiding, mind games, communications, just all forms of trickery and guile!
                     * Audiovisual Hallucination: So you cause a good number of people to hallucinate...basically anything you want. You can make them see any object, force or individual you can imagine or can designated them to imagine. This can...basically super fuck people as they see what you want them to see, causing them to run into traps, attack allies, like...the chaos this can cause is unimaginable and I FUCKING love it. This is frankly what I’ve always wanted for illusions. You want inspiration? Look up Genjutsu and just...have a fucking ball….ALSO reminder, its just a somatic component, so you can cast it even when silenced.
                     * Shrink Item: Wow, this spell is just FUN. Of course you can get into some cheesy nonsense with it but just being able to shrink a tree and throw it at a guy, is just...gold.
                     * Suggestion: A very open ended lesser dominate person as you tell someone to do something for you. This of course can be used for all manner of sillness. The INSANE duration gets cut short if they complete the request, so try to give something general to take advantage of it.
                     * ✰Shadow Enchantment✰: HAHAHAHAHAHA you can choose ANY enchantment spell from the Sorc OR psychic list...and the psychic actually gets some spells of this level early!!!! Shadow spells are amazing for sorcerer’s, giving us access to ENTIRE SUITES of spells. Sure you have to add a will save on top of it, but there are plenty of great spells that DON'T get saves or buffs you can cast that like...don’t need to be saved against. Like Christ this is so like useful for a sorcerer, basically all shadowspells now get the WEIRD but NEW rating of ✰Fucking Christ✰ which is better than 5 but not gamebreaking just super good.
                     * Dimensional Hop (Experimental Wordcaster): Teleport your fighter immediately in for a full attack from a range. #BetterCombatTeleportation
	Protection
	                     * Displacement: Give yourself 50% miss chance on all attacks. It’s not better than mirror image, but does stack with it, and makes everything awful. Probably something to pick up later.
	3rd Lvl Alt Sources
	                     * Explosive Runes (scroll): This is a fun spell that everyone loves. You’ll want to use it at least once. Book of explosive runes is a classic and IIIII will never not suggest having this somehow.
                     * Arcane Concordance (Ring of Spell Knoweldge/scroll): Steal it from the bard, for free metamagic!!! No seriously this is an aMAZING spell and finding a way to steal it should definitely be on our list of things to do.
                     * Magic Circle Against X (scroll): When you need it, you need it, and when you don't, you don't. Thing is, it only protects against a single alignment...per spell, and we don’t have the spells known to deal with all of these alignments. Which is a shame because this spell is one of the Three Pillars of Planar Domination, one of the earliest pathways to ultimate divinity. If only there was a spell like this one but we like...got to pick….yeah….that’d be nice.
                     * Conjure Carriage (scroll): Get a ride for the squad. You only really need it for long trips and even then, only when you don’t feel like dealing with, or can’t find normal transports.
                     * Tiny Hut (scroll): Nice little fun house for night time. Same vibe as Rope trick
                     * Tongues (scroll): Speak all of the languages, or summon an lantern archon to do it for you. You’ll want this every so often but like its okay.
                     * Resist Energy, Communal (scroll): Resist energy, but communal! Will be usefulness for pre-buffing for big fights, but not necessary on our list.
	________________
