# 6th Level Spells

6th Level Spells
	Control
	                           * Jatambe’s Ire✰: IF there is moral nuance or ambiguity in your games, do not take this spell. If you are good guys fighting evil people, constantly? This is a hilariously massive Greater Black Tentacles that only effects enemies. So great for undead or demon focused campaigns.
	Buff
	                           * Form of The Dragon I (also Blast/Protection): YAYYYY our first serious transformation buffs. Dragon’s can cast spells, so we can cast spells and this gives us some fucking JUICE. Bonus to Strength, Con, Natural Armor, 60ft Fly, Darkvision, Energy Resistance 20 or 30 (depending on the dragon), and a (that you can use once) 6d8 Breath Weapon, as well as some new movement options! This spell is versatile, helpful, has a good duration and honestly? Couldn’t suggest it more. If you want to be in melee for some ungodly reason??? This is one of the best ways to do it.
                           * Form of The Exotic Dragon I (also Blast/Protection): As Above but with access to Primal Dragons.
                           * Form of The Alien Dragon I (also Blast/Protection): As Above but with access to Esoteric Dragons
                           * Beast Shape IV: Okay so usually, I don’t like talking about the beast shape spells for sorcerers…because again unless we are in a form that can cast spells, we can’t cast, and we aren’t really built for melee...HOWEVER. Beast Shape IV is sort of the height of the beast shape line and fixes a lot of problems by getting us access to some AMAZING forms, like the Chimera, has no limitation on breath weapon usage unlike form of the dragon, great abilities and is all around a fan fucking tastic spell….tHAT REMOVES OUR SPELLCASTING DAMNIT. Anyway, this level is apparently the “melee sorcerer lover” level so...have fun.
                           * Undead Anatomy III (also Protection): So undead anatomy is a REALLY weird spell because RAW, skeleton and zombie aren’t creatures...they are templates that you aPPLY to creatures. Which leads to the reasonable ruling that Undead Anatomy allows you to apply Undead TEMPLATES to your character, rather than just taking the form of a generic creature stat block.

So with that understanding, it’s around this level that I think this transformation becomes REALLY cool. Become a lich and get some nice resistances, or a vampire and some cool powers. Overall its good for resistances, keeping casting, and some neat tricks.
                           * Elemental Body III (also Protection): Stat jump is okay but the real benefit here is being immune to crits, bleed, and sneak attack damage!!! Great option for people who want a lot of a movement option but don’t want to get dragged down with bells and whistles.
                           * Borrowed Time: Okay….you get an EXTRA swift action EVERY ROUND but if you use it, you take 1 con damage, which ya know isn’t great...but you don’t HAVE to take it. This can be used to activate abilities, cast swift action spells, and generally be a nuisance in all forms. This only gets MORE problematic if you can become immune to ability damage...in which case you only take 5 damage….for a swift action…..Oh no not fast healing 5. Oh noooooooooooooo-
	Debuff
	                              * ✰Negation (Experimental Wordcaster)✰: Drop ANTIMAGIC FIELD onto your enemies instead of yourself. This is hilariously strong and if played well can absolutely destroy encounters.
                              * Sirocco (also Blast): SO....another 20ft radius fuck you that does some baby damage BUTTTT if your opponents take ANY damage from this spell, they are fatigued...and then exhausted. ANY damage...and let me remind you, a fort save only HALFS to damage. So if they aren’t immune to fire or don’t have enough SR????? This can kinda shut down armies.
                              * Baleful Shadow Transmutation: Look at a creature within close range. Will save (w/ SR)...if they fail? They lose…*inhales* all extraordinary abilities, supernatural abilities, spell-like abilities, the ability to cast spells AT ALL, and gains the alignment, special abilities, and INT, WISDOM, AND CHARISMA scores of its NEW FORM in place of its own. Ya know the form you choose for it...which should be the shittiest one possible. Or cutest. I don’t judge….

Oh also they have to make a fort save or aCTUALLY turn into the creature...which is whatever but also remember they just lost… A LOT of stats potentially...just...consider.
                              * ✰Chains of Light✰: REFLEX SAVE NO SR!!!! Most monsters late game have GARBAGE reflex saves and this gets you a paralyze, again WITH NO SR!!!!!!!! NONE. Fail their save? They are out of the fight IMMEDIATELY. NO TELEPORTATION. NO SPELLS. NO NOTHING. THIS IS THEE DESTROYER OF HIGH LEVEL DEATH BEASTS.
                              * Flesh to Stone: Point to person. Fort Save (w/ SR). Did they fail? Okay then they lose and are now stone. Rip.
                              * Major Bestow Curse: Close range bestow curse that is harder to break, and has a higher DC. If you didn’t take spectral hand, but still thought this spell was neat, take this version.
	Blast
	                                 * Chain Lightning: Point your finger at one person, Reflex save (w /SR). IF they fail they take 1d6 per caster level (up to 20d6) zap damage AND you can choose up to your caster level in secondary targets who are within 30 feet of the first guy and also ZAP THEM for the same amount of damage. Ouch ouch ouch. Can take out some goons like almost nothing else.
                                 * Disintegrate: Anti force beam!!! Point to a person For Save (w/ SR) andddd if they fail they take 2d6 damage per caster level and if they die they are entirely disintegrated, being impossible to revive. It also automatically erases wall’s of force and other force constructs. This uh ouchie ouch spell if you get it off.
                                 * Hellfire Ray: Satanic Scorching Ray! You can fire one ray, plus one for every 4 levels beyond 11. Each ray does 1d6 damage (max 15d6) on a ranged touch attack (w/ SR) but no saves involved. The damage is half fire, half edge cringe unholy damage, which is nice.
                                 * Cold Ice Strike: Reflex save (w/SR) sure, 1d6 per casterlevel, yeah...thirty foot line is kinda small...I wonder what all the rage is abou- SWIFT ACTION???? YOU CAST THIS AS A SWIFT ACTION???????? WH-
	Summons
	                                 * Planar Binding (also Utility): Again, this spell is insane and is so powerful that I literally have no logical reason why I can tell you to not cast this every single day other than the fact that I know how powerful this spell is, and therefore, the chaos it can cause to campaigns. Lesser Planar Binding is annoying and can be problematic.

Planar binding proper, giving us access to creatures up to 12HD???? That’s when everything starts to break down. It’s at this level that we can summon and bind Efreeti (who only have 10HD) to cast Wish for substantially cheaper than it would cost to cast yourself and much earlier. It’s with this spell that you can kinda just...solve most problems in the campaign by summoning the right powerset. There are A LOT of extraplanar creatures with below 12HD that are REALLY powerful.

This, in my opinion, is the strongest spell in the game if used well....I mean...well second strongest...we haven’t gotten to Greater Planar Binding, yet.
                                 * Summon Monster VI: Surprisingly Solid! We usually don’t get back to back bangers on the SM list, but this one hands us the Dire Tiger, Lillend Azata, Huge elementals and neat dinosaurs.
                                 * Animate Objects: Awaken construct homie!!!!! You can animate...a surprising number of things with this spell to be really annoying! Also don’t forget...different sizes have different CP, giving them access to various abilities! Check out the animate object rules here.
                                 * Summon Genie, Greater: So real talk...Genie are nothing to fuck with. Yes this isn’t an efreeti, YES this doesn’t give you the most expansive spell list but these elemental overlords have some SERIOUS tells to work with. The Shaitan in particular is kinda amazing in the fact that it gets Wall of Stone, Stone Skin, and Stone Shape, all as SLA’s...oh and also QUICKENED glitterdust. Yeah. This spell isn’t a game.
	Utility
	                                    * Transfiguring Touch: “Alchemy. It is the scientific technique of understanding the structure of matter, decomposing it, and then reconstructing it. If performed skillfully, it is even possible to create gold out of lead. However, as it is a science, there are some natural principles in place. Only one thing can be created from something else of a certain mass. This is the Principle of Equivalent Exchange.”
                                    * ✰Dispel Magic, Greater✰ (also Debuff): Absolutely rip magic apart. At this level? Everything has magic. Break their buffs. Unmagic magic weapons. Smack a whole group of annoying spells all at once. This is a groundbreaker spell, and you WILL be on your list of spells known. 
                                    * ✰Shadow Enchantment, Greater✰: Every enchantment spell from the Sorcerer OR psychic spell list of 5th level or lower. Sure they require an extra save. Sure they require an illusion. This is still an insane amount of free spell versatility, giving you access to dozens upon dozens of spells, all with their own uses. This is godlike.
                                    * Mass Suggestion: Convince a bunch of people to do stuff for you. Can super be used to get into some wild as hell shenanigans.
                                    * Veil: Mass ultra Disguise! Now Anyone can be anything and no one will ever be the wiser...
                                    * Analyze Dweomer: True Detect Magic! Look at someone and tell EXACTLY what sort of buffs they are rocking, and how powerful they are. Combine with Greater dispel magic to be a fucking spell sniper.
	Protection
	                                    * Getaway: Pick a space and your homies. Basically, anytime during the duration, you can use a swift action to piece you and your homies the fuck out of a situation back to your rendevous point, potentially avoiding a TPK or making a transport mission that much easier.
                                    * Repulsion: HEY DONT TOUCH ME THERE, THIS IS MY NO-NO SQUARE!!!! Will Save (w/ SR). If they fail they cannot approach you! You can approach them but they cannot get any closer to you. Good for keeping melee off you.
                                    * Boosted Unseen Shell (Experimental Wordcaster): Give your entire party greater invisibility while they hang out with you. Make everyone’s life miserable. The boosted version is a 6th level spell but you also get the normal version at 4th level version
                                    * Energy Immunity (Experimental Wordcaster): Become immune to an energy type! At this level, like this isn’t a bad option, especially if you know who you are up against, but we also have resist energy 30 which handles MOST things pretty well. 
                                    * Resist Arcana (Experimental Wordcaster): Get spell resistance 12+caster level! Usually, you don’t get to have spell resistance, but now, you can make the DM roll incredibly silly checks! See how they like it!!!!! While most monsters have SR, they don’t usually have the tools to bypass it themselves. (Also remember you can voluntarily lower your SR)
	6th Lvl Alt Sources
	                                    * Contingency (scroll): Definitely Definitely Definitely something you want in your back pocket. Set a condition and attach a spell to that condition. If that condition is met within the next...CL number of days, then the spell goes off instantaneously. For example..ifff the condition is “be below half health” and you attach Teleport, the next time you are under half health, contingency will IMMEDIATELY cast teleport! Can and will save your life and your teammates life at least once.
                                    * Geas/Quest (scroll): Make someone your slave...errr in a more general sense. A really good way to seal the deal on Planar Binding spells, and can be a really interesting way to handle contracts or deals, as it has some incredibly serious penalties long term for disobedience.
                                    * Mage’s Decree (scroll): Mass speech, or weird secret orders thing that is honestly? Super sick. You will not use this every day, but when you do it’ll be super cool as you let everyone within 12 miles know that you have the biggest dick in existence.
                                    * Genius Avaricious (scroll): Spend 3000gp every month or so to get a MASSIVE stacking boost to your charisma, and immunity to poison, disease, and aging. Is it super evil? Yeah! Does it damn you? No! So we don’t care!!! Later on, buy an extended scroll to have it last even longer.
                                    * Guards and Wards (scroll): Tower defense spell! You wont always be on defense but if you are, this spell is really useful for locking down a building.
                                    * Impart Mind (scroll): Arcane awaken!!! Create intelligent item!!! We are not taking this as a spell because its super expensive, but you can basically make an artifact at late level and give it a bunch of really cool spell like abilities that it can use at will if you have the funds to burn!!!
                                    * Summon Flight of Eagles (scroll): Okay. You all know you want to pull a gandalf at least once. Come on. Don’t act like you don’t want to do it AT LEAST ONCE!!!!
                                    * True Seeing (scroll): See ALL the things. You know all of those pesky sorcerer’s using BLUR and MIRROR IMAGE to make themselves virtually unhittable! Well now you have the counter HAHAHA. See through the enemy’s invisibility and such is incredibly helpful and will save your life at least once.
                                    * Emblem of Greed (scroll): Do I suggest casting this often? No. Is this the best way for a sorc to be in melee? Definitely not. Is it fucking cool to suddenly be a kung fu master with this glavie you just pulled out of your ass? Absolutely. Style points always matter.

Now that said, while this is usually meh, it does give you a BAB equal to your caster level. So if one were to say, perhaps, have a way of boosting their caster level through the stratosphere with an army of time clones. Well….then this would probably be significantly better and somehow give you ultra BAB. Somehow.
	________________
