# 4th Level Spells

4th Level Spells
	 Control
	                     * Black Tentacles: Saving throws? SR? Get that shit out of here. Everything within a 20ft radius gets hit with cosmic hentai a mass of angry tentacles that are immune to damage, and try to grapple ANYONE who enters that range. This is an AMAZING AMAZING control tool, as the tentacles deal damage, forcing concentration checks, have a pretty damn good modifier, and once again, do not have any SR or Save, just grapple checks that can be a major pain in the ass. NICE.
                     * Solid Fog: As fog cloud but people can’t shoot ranged attack through it, take penalties to melee, still can't see shit, and have to move at half speed (note it is not difficult terrain). This is really good….and much better for us because we can still see through it. Because you took Ashen Path….RIGHT >.>
                     * Resilient Sphere: Reflex Save or get bubbled!!! This works as wall of force, which makes it a motherfucker to get out of, spells can’t bypass it, and it has an outrageous defense. So if someone gets bubbled by this, they are probably stuck there unless they can teleport.
                     * Acid Pit (also Blast)(w/ Cherry Blossom Spell): Like create pit, but with ACID!!! Super deep, extra annoying, and now with a rarely resisted damage type and still no spell resistance allowed. Add Cherry Blossom Spell to have people slowly melt away as time rips them to shreds...YAY :D
	Buff
	                     * Borrow Future (Experimental Wordcaster): Anyone remember Celerity from 3.5? Yeah, meet it’s younger brother. Enjoy using quickened metamagic to give yourself two turns for the price of one, or just casting this on the fighter to give them as many attacks as they could damn well desire.
                     * Telekinetic Charge: Throw the fighter at their target with an almighty YEET. Not as good as Dimensional Hop in my opinion BUT its a fun way to position your teammates
                     * Monstrous Physique II (also Utility): Okay good movement options, some defense buffs with our natural armor make it good for survivability. It can also get pretty wacky if you turn into a Doppelganger, since you get access to Mimcry, which allows you to cast from spell trigger and completion items as if you had their class list. Fun stuff! (Also we can still cast spells. Woo!)
                     * Fey Form I: Minor boost to stats, some movement options, AND if whatever you transform into as SLA’s that match the spells you cast, you can cast those spells Silenced and Still, and it can’t be counterspelled! Neat!!!!
                     * Shadow Projection (Also Protection): This spell is a doozy if your GM goes by like James Jacobs FAQ’s and such. He says here, that shadows SHOULD be able to speak common, thus meaning they have limbs, and can speak, so they should be able to cast. This isn’t totally off base as they are intelligent undead (albiet not the brightest) and have a societal hierarchy. Also this technically isn’t a polymorph spell, so that ruling shouldnt apply in the first place, but just in case your DM is the fickle sort...

Now that that’s out of the way this spell lets you be an incorporeal battle ghost for hours per day. Being incorporeal is really really cool, gives us a lot of defensive options and makes us much harder to kill….the downside is that we don’t really get our items for the duration. Great for stealth or campaigns where you don’t get a lot of magic items that you use daily, but it will hurt not to have your headband of stats. Still, for the amount of use you can get out of this? Might be worth it until you can pick up an Amulet of Grasping Souls and just GO HAM. Also remember, that if you die in the shadow, you die in real life, so like...don’t be stupid. 

Also Beware of DM’s that will try to fuck with your body. Don’t...don’t let that be a thing.
	Debuff
	                        * Confusion: Alright, everyone in this 15ft circle? Will save (with SR) or have a 75% chance of being aBSOLUTELY useless this round….which can be turned into a 100% chance if you are a caster who gets bapped and must now attempt to bap a fighter. Have. Fucking. Fun.
                        * Envervation: So negative levels were a lot….scarier in 3.5. Back then, if you took negative levels, you actually lost like...spell slots and shit. That said, it’s not like its a total joke now. Your DC’s get lower, you lose 5 HP from your total health PER level, and all your saves, skills are such get a -1 per negative level. This is uh...well if it hits it’s a sort of all around fuck you, but not...game ender. Just make sure you heal it off, okay?
                        * Calcific Touch: Okay, once again, YOU TOOK SPECTRAL HAND RIGHT??? Okay, good. Once per round, every round of this spell, you can bap someone with a touch attack. If they get hit, they take 1d4 Dex damage, no save, and have to fort save or be slowed. If they get to 0 dex? Petrified...permanently. This is a sort MONSTER of a spell for big creatures who have shit dex, and can be used to pass around the pain or just smack one guy with as much fuck off damage as possible. Combine this with...idk...touch of gracelessness or something to get him to 1 and then zero them out the same turn. 
                        * Moonstruck: Point at any caster, archer...anyone who you know isn’t supposed to be in melee. They make a will save (with SR)...and if they fail they are dazed for 1 round...which is already like...not good. Then they grow FUCKING CLAWS and are CONFUSED and attempt to attack everything with their new werewolf powers! AND THEN AT THE END? THEY ARE DAZED AGAIN. Welcome to Save or Lose.
                        * Mydriatic Spontaneity: Aka, Nauseating Blindness, as you basically smack them with the Seizure Beam MKII, causing one person to save or be nauseated. This is really just a fun one.
                        * Bestow Curse: Aka “Lesser Fuck You.” Yes. Lesser. And again, for the love of god PLEASE tell me you took spectral hand? You promise? Okay good. So basically, this lets you choose one of many fuck you abilities...and just gives you a lesser version, maximizes it and makes it permanent. Enervation? -4 to all saves and skills. Ray of X? -6 to one stat, flat out. Confusion? 50% chance you just can’t do anything...forever...and you can make your own curses like this is just like...like Lesser wish but all of the bad things. Aka...Lesser Fuck You. We’ll get to Fuck You proper later.
                        * Fear: Save (w/ SR) or be removed from combat. I’m serious. It’s a emotion, mind effecting, fear effect, so there is a lot that is flat out immune but what isn’t...well...if they fail their save they are just kinda OUTIE. Ah I love the save or lose level. It’s so much fun.
                        * Wandering Star Motes: Aka Dazing Dancing Dots, whose whole purpose is to flit around, bap people in the noggin, take away ALL of their actions for that round and then force them to keep saving while the team beats them up. Requires some teamwork to REALLY pull it off, but my god...is it funny when it works.
                        * Mass Daze: BUNCH OF PEOPLE. Will Save (w/ SR) or be dazed...for one round. Now don’t get me wrong, if you play this right it can be good BUTttt...I think there are other ways to ruin people for longer.
                        * Firefall (also Blast)(w/ Selective Spell): Okay...choose a fire source (preferably a magical one). All creatures and objects within 60 FEET OF THE SOURCE take 5d6 damage and must reflex save or catch fire. That’s...that’s everyone. Everyone is on fire. “But Iluzry” I hear you ask, “I thought this was a debuff spell???” It is….because everyone within 120 FEET of the fire source have to make a WILL SAVE or be bLINDEDED!!! WHICH AGAIN...IS EVERYONE!!!!!!!!!!!! Cast flaming sphere and then just keep fucking pounding people with saves, at SR NO. Uh...it’s actually so insane that you should probably wait until you can get Selective Spell to get it, just so that you don’t like...blind your friends!!!!
                        * Dimensional Anchor (also Utility): Ah yes, the third spell in the Three Pillars of Planar Domination. This one is actually pretty useful on its own. Ranged touch attack, no save, yes DR. If it hits, then they just can’t teleport. This keeps particularly annoying creatures from escaping and as you level up, this will become more and more common.
	Blast
	                        * Dragon’s Breath: So this one isn’t a super fancy spell, but just like fireball, has a really good foundation. 1d6 per caster level of cold, electricity, acid, or fire damage, Reflex save (w/ SR). Good versatile spell that lets you control the area type, and energy type that can handle any number of opponents. If you aren’t building around an element and just need a generalist blasting spell, just in case? This is a great great pick up.
                        * Aggressive Thundercloud, Greater: As Aggressive thundercloud, but now, the first person to get bapped might be stunned and it does more damage.
                        * Flaming Sphere, Greater: As a normal flaming sphere but now, it does more damage, and they might catch on fire!
                        * Boneshatter (also Debuff): Point to...really any creature that has inside or outside bones. So like...if its a ghost, or some spooky elemental/Logia nonsense, this doesn’t work, but outsiders aren’t...inherently immune. That said Fort Save (w/SR) or take 1d6 per caster level and also be exhausted for a minute. Ouch and Yikes. Skeletons get it even worse.
	Summons
	                        * Animate Dead: Okay. This costs 25 GP per HD and requires touch, so it’s not really for mid combat but...if you are trying to be a necromancer? This is THE necromancer spell. This is your bread and butter, milk and honey, lover from afar and your pride and joy. This is how you build your army of the undead, and how you break the world over your knee. Do you want to be a ruler of the undead? This is where it starts. You aren’t the best at this, but this is how you do it.
                        * Phantom Steed, Communal: Everyone gets a super sick horse!!! Love that. If you already have a super sick way of travel, don’t worry about it.
                        * Summon Monster IV: It’s not a bad spell at all, it’s just ya know...not...a fucking amazing at this level. You don’t want to pick up SM at every level but this is still one of the best spells of this level.
	Utility
	                        * ✰Shadow Conjuration✰: Jesus fuck. You can cast any summoning or creation conjuring spell of 3 level or lower...and that’s A LOT of spells. A lot of potentially REALLY good spells. Yes it requires an extra save, Yes, it’s not perfect but god damn does this give you versatility.
                        * Dimension Door: YAY TELEPORTATION. Teleport friends into kill range, get past the horde, get into the secret building, like its just a lot of options and we love that.
                        * Arcane Eye: Play I-Spy with an Eye Spy. Knowing things is always useful, and being able to sneak in bugs can always be useful.
                        * Stone Shape: Smack stone and make it shapeshift however you want! Great for making doors in castles, and eventually, once you gain wall of stone, making a castle for yourself as you bap a bunch of walls and start turning them into a god-damn city.
                        * Complex Hallucination: This is where I think Hallucination spells surpass image spells, because now you can include TACTILE elements to your hallucinations, having them be entirely immersed in the world you create for them. Now you can basically fool them into thinking anything and it looks, feels and sounds as real as their mind will allow, which is incredibly rude but also really really fun. Convince your enemy you’ve cast time stop and they can’t move as you slaughter their friends and family in the dream, only for them to wake up to the nightmare that is you. Enjoy being Aizen you sick fuck.
                        * Charm Monster: Make anyone be your friend!!! This is great for handling situations diplomatically or just getting access to places that you definitely shouldn’t.
	Protection
	                        * Stoneskin: A bit expensive BUT it gets you dR 10 adamantine for a while and trust me, that comes in handy more often than you’d think.
                        * Emergency Force Sphere: Now this...wars have been fought over this spell. Entire threads? Burned to the fucking ground over this spell.  This is THE spell you will be picking up for defense. As an IMMEDIATE action, meaning as soon as someone even tRIES you, summon a 5ft Hemispherical dome with a bunch of hitpoints. NOW. This blocks line of sight, so you can’t cast through it. On the off chance that someone, somehow, gets through your blur, mirror image, wall, and actually tries to land a hit on you, you immediately immediately tell them to fuck right off.
                        * Globe of Invulnerability, Lesser: Hey remember all of those amazing 3rd level and below spells I’ve been talking about. You are now entirely immune to them, congrats. This specifically includes spell like abilities,  and remember, even if a spell is cast with metamagic, it still counts as a lower level for the purpose of effects (with the exception of heightened spell). So no, that empowered, maximized fireball did not work on your party. 
                        * Greater Invisibility (also Utility): AH THE BLEEDING EDGE OF SCUMBAG CASTER TECHNOLOGY. Now, even if you use attacking spells, you are still invisible! What’s more, the rogue and all its cousins can add their damage dice without care and stealth becomes a breeze. You love it, you want it, and being an illusionist fucking rocks.
                        * Horrific Doubles: Mirror Image, but terrifying!!!
                        * Shocking Image: Mirror image, but shocking!
                        * Thaumaturgic Circle (Also Utility): Magic circle against whatever I want!!! Much preferred to the lower level version of magic circle against 1 thing!!! Again, this is the second key spell to the Three Pillars of Planar Domination. The time of binding is slowly coming upon us. Note, that this also can be affected by Emergency Attunement.
	4th Lvl Alt Sources
	                        * Scrying (scroll): Time to be the NSA and spy on people like an old school witch. Knowing things is always useful, but this isn’t something I’d expect you to cast every day.
                        * Minor Creation (scroll): You create some vegetable matter! You can get creative with this thought not enough that I can recommend it as a spell known.
                        * Eyes of Void (scroll): See through all darkness, darkness is no longer a problem. Similar space to Ashen path, but there are FAR more cloud spells that we can abuse than darkness. Still, it’s nice to have when some devil thinks it’s being clever.
                        * Conjuration Foil (scroll): Don’t summon shit. Again, not really a necessary spell, but if you find yourself attacked by a summoner of sorts, this is a hilarious thing to cast.
                        * Mnemonic Enhancer (Ring of Spell Knowledge/Circlet of Spell Eating): Are you preparing spells using Versatile Spontaneity? Congrats you can now prepare 3 more levels worth of spells. It’s not much, but it’s more.
