# 1st Level Spells

1st Level Spells
	Control
	         * ✰Deja Vu✰: Okay no save, your opponent has to repeat whatever actions it took in the last round, for two rounds, and if they can’t, they are confused. Making enemies more predictable is fantastic, or forcing enemies to act in a way that keeps you in the advantage, is awesome. This is sort of an insane first level control spell.
         * Grease: The OG control spell. Choose a 10 ft square. Everyone in that square make a reflex save (Which monsters tend to be meh at) or fall prone, making them easy cleanup for your melee team. You’ll find...other uses for it in the future, but trust me when i say this is a go-to for a reason.
         * Obscuring Mist: Another classic. This blinds archers, blocks line of sight from other casters, makes it harder for melee personnel to see. It only gets BETTER if you pick up the Magic Trick Feat, or a saltspray ring...and woo just wait until the next level when this can become EVEN DIRTIER.
         * Expeditious Construction: Baby’s first wall spell!!! Gives us cover, blocks line of sight, and can be surprisingly sturdy. What’s not to love? Remember, since this is an instantaneous conjuration (creation) spell, the magic simply assembles the materials, afterwards, its real! Have fun building!
	Buff
	         * ✰Enlarge Person✰: ENBIGGENATE!!!!! The classic go to Buff. Your martial will love this from level 1 to level 20, even if they get better buffs because this gives three very important things: Extra Strength, Higher Damage Die, and REACH. That last one is super important because its actually pretty hard to increase your reach...especially constantly. Want to be a team player? Take this, and keep it moving.
	Debuff
	         * Color Spray: So this spell gets a bad rap for not being useful after level 5 but...creatures who are hit by it are still STUNNED For a turn, which can be a death sentence. At level 1-5? Anything hit by this baby is out of the fight immediately. Blinded, stunned, possibly even unconscious, its will save or just be done and THAT is how casters do it.
         * Ray of Enfeeblement: Fort save or take hilarious amounts of strength damage. If you make your save? CONGRATS...YOU STILL TAKE HALF. Use this to whittle down brawlers, or make it so the caster can’t move his arms lmao.
         * Touch of Gracelessness: Like Ray of enfeeblement BUT its a touch attack and deals DEXERITY DAMAGE. You’ll probably want to use this with a familiar or spectral hand, but this can directly lower your opponents AC...making them easier to kill for your team, or at higher levels, if they just have GARBAGE Dex and just become barely mobile and mostly paralyzed.
         * Unlock Flesh: Fort save or become flayed and staggered. NOW they can attempt a standard action to make their save again...but doing so means that they've now used their standard action...meaning they cant do anything else that turn, effectively making this a pseudo hold person. Again, it’s a touch attack, so get a familiar or spectral hand, or reach or something to help you out.
         * Sleep: So this is a bit of a polarizing one. From levels lets say 1-5 where you meet creatures with HD 4 or less and basically just have to be able survive the “cats can kill you” period of being a caster, this is INVALUABLE...but after which point it quickly falls into irrelevance as the foes you face, even the weaker ones, grow stronger. One of your first to pick up and first to switch out.
         * Cause Fear: Will save or become FRIGHTENED, which effectively removes them from the fight. Doesn’t work on anyone after 6HD so ya know, if you are around level 5 or so, definitely worth ditching.
         * Break: Lmao this spell is rude as hell. Okay so the item rolls a fort save...or be broken. Now, being broken doesn’t DO much to most items...but if it fails it’s save a second time, it’s destroyed. This works on ANY medium sized or smaller object...meaning that if you heighten this spell and smack the BBEG’s rod of infinite power enough times, you can just...break his shit. God damnit I love casters.
	Blast
	         * Ear-Piercing Scream (also Debuff): REEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE. You scream and the target takes some meh sonic damage (still very rarely resisted) and has to make a fort save or be DAZED which is...another ouchy ouch condition. Anything we can do to make the enemy lose actions, we take.
         * Magic Missile: THE first level arcane spell. Point to a creature (no attacking the darkness). That creature now just...takes 1d4+1 force damage, per two levels. Now, is this a small amount of damage? Yes totally...but it’s also no save automatic force damage so long as you can beat spell resistance, making it great against incorporeals or people with low health but CRAZY defenses. Later on, you’ll want to intensify and quicken it for just free damage to a target.
	Summons
	         * Animate Rope: Funny note, doesn’t HAVE to be a rope, just rope like. Curtains, Chains...whatever you have around can function. It’s a versatile little partner too, being able to entangle foes one minute, or make triplines to stop pursuers, or help you climb the castle walls! Use with mage hand to have some fun little options.
         * Mount (w/ Heightened Spell and Alter Summoned Monster): Now this spell? This spell is worth it’s weight in gold and then some. It summons a basically spirit horse for 2 hours per level...which is insane. This is a better summon than most of the monsters on the Summon Monster I list, and lasts far longer. Having a mount means you can spend less actions moving and more casting, and they can even be good shields or combat buddies! Great spell at low levels...but what about at higher levels???

Weeeellll at higher levels...if you pick up the metamagic feat Heightened Spell and a wand of Alter Summoned Monster, this feat can basically mimic ANY higher level Summon Monster Spell...with a far longer duration. If you can’t get the wand, take it as a spell known...it’s on your list! Basically means that at the beginning of the day, you can burn a spell slot to get an all day companion, making one of the most, if not the most versatile spell combination for a sorcerer to have. If your DM lets you do this, don’t be a jerk about it...this could save you a LOT of spells known in the long run. Take it and run.
         * Summon Minor Monster: So this spell is fun because the only limitations are 1.) you can’t summon it in an environment that cannot support it and 2.) it has to be tiny or smaller animals...which does not necessarily indicate their power :3 Throw out a skunk for debuffs, some Owls or Hawks for airborne dpr, bats for detecting invisible creatures, or just some other critter to scratch their face off. You’ve got options!!!!
	Utility
	            * Auditory Hallucination: Aka GREATER ghost sounds. How is this better than the at will cantrip? Well a few things. First of all, better range and no sound upper limit...but it also is sneakier, as you can choose which creatures to effect by it. This can also work on your own team as a sort of...psuedo telepathy or with collaborators as a pseudo tongues.. But most importantly, you don’t actually have to KNOW what the thing you want ACTUALLY sounds like. You just have to have an idea of it. Never spoken the guards language? It’s fine! Don’t know what that monster sounds like? It’s cool. So long as you have the idea, it flies! Great in a creative players hands.
            * Blood Money: The only reason we want ANY higher level of strength. Taking strength damage to pay for expensive components is a pretty crazy way to get around component cost, but not practical for things like Wish...still it can save you a lot of money if you have a way of healing the ability damage. Of course, if you find a means to have an absurd strength score, this becomes better! (not as good as a wand because its normally a swift action, not a standard)
            * Charm Person: Make someone your best friend! This lasts for ONE HOUR PER LEVEL so if you get someone, you can REALLY get them, and to convince them to do something for you, you need to make a charisma check….OH HEY WE ARE GOOD AT THOSE!!! The magic of friendship should never be underestimated.
            * Floating Disk (w/ Magic Trick): So on its own, I would not suggest this spell….but with a few ranks in fly and a feat??? You can basically turn a first level slot into fly. That is HILAROUSLY useful. Not only can it save you a higher level spell known, but if you pick up heightened spell, which if you saw mount you probably should anway, you can even carry your friends on this moving doom platform! Ever wanna be the best super hero? This is how we do it.
            * Silent Image: This spell accompanied by ghost sounds ties with mount and alter summoned monster for crazy versatility. I’m serious! You can make this look like anything and with silent image, it can sounds like anything, and for most people, if it looks like a duck and sounds like a duck, its a duck, and you can abuse that. Moreover, unlike the other combination, this one is dirt cheap...both of them spells are good on their own! Just requires a creative mind. Remember, creatures can only disbelieve your illusion if they directly interact with it. They don’t get a save from just seeing it unless it says so.
	Protection
	            * Mage Armor: This one is for you. It’s a free AC bump that lasts a very long time...and as you go on, you will want to get armor but a lot of times its actually cheaper to diversify before it makes sense to actually get an armor bonus over this spell. For now take it, and MAYBE take a mithiral buckler, and keep it moving. It’s more useful than you think.
            * Stone Shield: As an immediate action, intercept an attack with a wall, giving you +4 to your ac. My 5e players will notice that this is basically their shield, but a little weaker. STILL, as a sorc, we always have our spells on tap, and being able to summon a wall of suddenly +4 ac can be a life saver, even if its only for a round!
            * Vanish (also Utility): So at level 1 this isn’t great, because you basically cast it on yourself and then move and then it goes away...but it gets better and better. You’ll want to trade it out for its older brother, invisibility, when you get the chance, but for now, being able to vanish and mess with people indirectly is fantastic.
	1st Lvl Alt Sources
	            * Alarm (wand): Good for preventing ambushes at night, not worth taking a spell slot for.
            * Heightened Awareness (wand): +2 to perception checks and knowledge checks for 10 minutes per level, annnd can be dispelled for a +4 to initiative.
            * Alchemical Tinkering (scroll): Can be crazy if you have the team or the build for it, but too infrequent to use a spell known.
            * Comprehend Languages (scroll): Incredibly helpful given the nature of languages in PF1e BUTTTT not something we will be dealing with every day.
            * Break (wand): Cast it twice and destroy the BBEG’s toy, or the fighters stick or what have you. Doesn’t matter what it’s hardness is, or anything like that. Hit this twice? It’s destroyed.
            * Infernal Healing (wand): Our caster level doesn’t particularly matter for this, and since it’s out of combat healing, we will take it.
            * Cure Light Wounds (wand): Same as above.
            * Feather Fall (wand / snapleaf / ring of featherfall): When you need it? You need it. Otherwise, we can live without it. If someone else has this prepared you can go without.
            * Expeditious Retreat (scroll): Sometimes...you gotta go fast….thats it, just something for the sonic fans.
            * Disguise Self (Hat of Disguise): Being able to be other people is great! But why burn a spell known when you can instead, just get this awesome fashion accessory and take the chameleon scales cantrip.
            * Ears of the City (wand): Gathering information is fun, and knowing things is always useful. This is great if your DM makes you do this often and you have the ranks in diplomacy, but remember...we don’t have a lot of ranks in anything!!!
            * Protection from X (scroll): So you wont need this...often but when someone gets dominated, or if you keep getting bapped by summoned monsters, this will be a great keepsake.
            * Lesser Restoration (wand): Steal it from the paladin and use it to cure all that damage you took from blood money.
            * Tears to Wine (scroll/wand): Steal it from the shaman or bard. Get a MASSIVE Boost to skill checks from drinking some dope uh….”wine.” Great for wizards well anyone trying to make int or wisdom checks...which includes us! This goes to perception and spellcraft!!!!
	

________________
