# 2nd Level Spells

2nd Level Spells
	Control
	            * Create Pit: So this is a “create problem” spell. Before flying gets involved, and frankly, for a while after that, you just drop this sucker down and BOOM they have a problem. Reflex save or get stuck in the hole. Also after the whole is made, if you are pushed into the hole, you do not get a save if you fail to the effect so….in the hole you go!
            * Stone Call (also Blast): Do some meh AOE damage (but enough to count for Dazing Spell) but make a significant portion of the ground difficult terrain...which means your enemies have to move at half speed and can’t charge. It’s also save No and SR No so just...take these rocks I guess?
            * Web: Alright. Reflex save or be grappled? Made your save? Okay you try to move? Great….Make a CMB or Escape artist check? You failed? You are grappled? You passed? It’s difficult terrain. Also so long as there is at least 5 feet of webbing between you and your opponent, you have cover
            * Euphoric Cloud (also debuff): Okay so just...I gotta keep my straight face for this one because...god this is so funny...okay so like it counts as fog cloud so it blocks all sight and you roll fort or you are fascinated. The reason this is REALLY GOOD is because the people who fail this...can’t see. Meaning they can’t see any immediately hostile threats...so they are basically just out of combat until one of them realises something bad is going on...and now that I’ve done the adult thing- #420BLAZEIT #SMOKEWEEDEVERYDAY #SOHIGHICANFLY #JOININGTHEWARONDRUGSONTEAMDRUGS #TOOOOOHIGGGHHH
	Buff
	            * ✰Ashen Path✰: Okay this is DECEPTIVELY good. The problem with a lot of AOE control spells (at least latter on) is that you can’t see shit. That’s normally sorta the point, to blind the enemy, but if YOUR TEAM can’t see shit, then it’s an issue...until you get this spell and suddenly? All cloud spells go up a rating because now, you and your whole gang, and see RIGHT through it. No concealment for them and they can’t see you. Take it, take it, take it, take it, take it, take it, take it for the love of all that is arcane if you EVER use a SINGLE cloud spell take this.
	Debuff
	            * Blindness/Deafness: Look at a person and say “fuck you in particular”. That person makes a fort save or is blinded or deafened….forever I guess lmao. This is an incredibly rude thing to do...but like ya know...it fucking works. Blind the archer, deafen the caster, make everyone’s day hell and remind them why the sorcerer is to be feared. Fun note...it’s a verbal only spell, meaning you can use it without your hands :D
            * Aboleth’s Lung: This is the reason we are picking up spectral hand? Why? Well touch attack + will save. They fail? They can’t breath air. This...basically forces them to keep making con checks to like hold their break, which can completely shut down casters, and be a real nuisance to everyone else as they just...immediately being to suffocate. Remember kids, holding your breath doesnt matter if you cANT BREATH AIR.
            * Glitterdust: This spell was made by gays, for gays...but we’ll share with everyone else. GLITTER BLAST!!!! So this also blinds people, but at least it’s not forever, and completely removes any chance they had at stealthing or invisibility ever. Also remember, this effects multiple people in a 10 foot spread. Time to ruin that platoon!
            * Hideous Laughter: Will save, or your opponent can take no actions. They aren’t helpless! But...they can’t do shit. Which is hilarious. They can try to make a new save as a full round action, but that still wastes their time, and wasting their time is the name of the game for debuffs. 
            * Mortal Terror: Okay this can make fear coniditions...basically skyrocket, but they HAVE to fail that first will save. If they do this can get NASTY, as every time they take damage, they have to make another save or their fear gets WORSE. Shakened is one thing. Frightened, and Panicked are a completely different beast. If you are going to take this, I highly suggest picking up a scroll of Bloody Tears and Jagged Smile.
            * Shatter: Fuck that item in particular. The door? Fuck it. The lock? Fuck it. That sword? Fuck your sword. I have a special love for this spell because it can be used to ruin people’s days in a number of ways, but mainly, just fuck your gear.
            * Limp Lash: Okay...smack a target with a ranged touch attack within 20ft? Did it hit? Great, they are taking 1d6 damage to their Strength, Dex, AND con, every turn, so long as you hold your magical whip. If they move outside the range of the spell, the spell ends but WOO boy, even if you just get them once? This is horrifying. It has SR but like...this still can be a fight ender, especially if you are using your control spells well.
            * ✰Ghoul Touch✰: So it says fort negates, but fort only negates the STENCH effect, not the paralysis!!! All that requires is a successful melee touch attack. This can EASILY take major players out of the fight REALLY early on. Absolutely must have especially if you took…that’s right…SPECTRAL HAND. YOU DID TAKE THAT RIGHT????
	Blast
	            * Burning Arc: Chain flame attack!  It targets reflex, which a lot of monsters aren’t stellar at, and lets you get 1 guy for d6/level, the next guy with d6/2 levels, and so on and so forth. Solid damage option, and this is the level when we can actually contribute to damage in a meaningful way. Just remember...fire damage.
            * Scorching Ray: This one scales really weirdly but it does really nice damage for us. Some people have a good reflex save. Almost NO ONE has a good touch ac, so having a no save lazer beam is pretty fucking sick. After all, if it works for the emperor of evil, why not have it work for us? Just remember… SR and fire damage.
            * Flaming Sphere: Make a big ball of fire that you can move around as a move action. This is a good spell to have when you are doing other things, as you can just keep bapping people with flaming sphere every turn while casting even more spells. Again remember, fire and SR.
            * Aggressive Thundercloud: Oh hey, its flaming sphere, but with electricity damage! This technically gives concealment to whoever is in it….or would if we hadn’t taken Ashen Path… you did take that remember? So really its just a better damage type.
	Summons
	            * Summon Monster II: So this is when summon monster becomes...sorta worth it. It’s not bad, don’t get me wrong, but it’s nothing compared to next level. For now, you get some fun elementals, and a few monsters that can be nice walls. If you are doing the mount strats, don’t bother, but if you want extras it’s always a good pick up.
            * ✰Spectral Hand✰: There are SOOOOOOOO many really really deadly touch spells between levels 1-4 that are super super super good and this makes them ALL viable. If you plan on using ANY touch spells between levels 1-4? Any of them at all? This WILL be worth it then.
            * Mount, Communal: Are you using Alter Summoned Monster like I told you to? Good. This is a strict upgrade to regular mount, as you can now have multiple creatures that all last a fuck long amount of time. You’ll be doing this outside of combat, so extending it isn’t a problem.

Did the DM ban this combo (which I’m not saying they should)? Then skip, and just wait for the next level, we can get you a better horse.
	Utility
	               * Detect Thoughts: Reading people's minds is cool. Remember that A.) it is a cone meaning you are detecting MANY thoughts and B.) they only get a will save on round 3, and C.) there is nothing that says your target is alerted when they succeed. This is a great mass information gathering tool when in towns, just don’t forget to be inconspicuous about it.
               * Knock: Open everything!!!! If something is closed, locked, and you don’t have the key? Now it is not closed or locked. Oddly useful, just don’t...don’t steal the rogues thunder too much. They deserve love too ya know.
               * Alter Self (also buff): Hey, polymorph into other races! Good for either turning your familiar into a person, and having fun with that, hiding out or simply just getting that swim speed those aquatic bloodlines keep talking about...
	Protection
	               * ✰Mirror Image✰: THE BEST Defensive spell at this level, and frankly for the majority of the game. You will always cast this. I’m not joking. This? This should be the first mitigation spell you pick up because it’ll NEVER be unhelpful. Even if there is 1 image, that is basically a 50% miss chance. If there are 3? 4? 8?????? This spell makes you much much harder to bring down. THE SORCERER USED DOUBLE TEAM. THEIR EVASION ROSE!!!!
               * Resist Energy (w/ Emergency Attunment): This is something you’ll want a little later in your career, but is no less useful. Being able to resist energy attacks can save you a whole mess of damage later on, and getting up to resistance 30 at level 11 is HUGE. On its own, it’s a great thing to pick up when you know you are going to be up against something big, but it only gets BETTER with emergency attunement, allowing you to have the exact resistance you need, when you need it.
               * Blur: When people try to hit you  there is a 20% chance that they do not. While I don’t say avoid bumping your ac, at a certain point is far safer to just make it hilariously difficult to even try to hit you. This shouldn’t be the first of what we will call...mitigation defense spells, but it’s good to have. Later replace it with Cloak of Displacement Minor
               * Invisibility (Also Utility): HAHAHA ooooh this demon of a spell. Another classic from the arcane school? Why? Because it last minutes per level and the ONLY thing that breaks it is direct damage. So long as you can manage to NOT blast? Buff? Summoning? Debuffing (without attack rolls) All fair game. Also your rogues will love you and give you some nice loot.
	2nd Lvl Alt Sources
	               * Alter Summoned Monster (wand): Turns Mount into your go to summoning spell, making one spell known as good as 9. I think this is a cool thing and gives sorcerer’s unique flexibility that should be celebrated. Others may beg to differ. Either way, if allowed, I definitely think this is something you should pick up as a wand. If wands are available? Move this to utility and then pick it up as a spell known. It's worth it.
               * Full Pouch (wand): Do you have someone who uses alchemical items? A gunslinger? Perhaps an investigator? They’ll love you for this. This can get weird, but definitely can save someone a pretty penny.
               * Command Undead (scroll): Are you a necromancer? Then you need this. Are you not a necromancer? Then you’ll probably want at least one of this for when the DM throws skeletons at you.
               * Bloody Tears and Jagged Smile (wand/scroll): The natural attack is whatever, we aren’t going to use it. What we are here for is the +4 to Fear Spell DC’s. Fear spells can absolutely DESTROY people but a lot of creatures are immune or worse, make their save and basically just get shaken. A +4 to end your opponent is tasty. Probably not spell known tasty, but definitely have in your back pocket tasty.
               * Diminish Resistance (scroll): Hey is that fire resistance 30 being the ABSOLUTE Worse and none of your party has a way around it this time? IS your magus TIRED of not being able to shocking grasps the boss as much as they’d like? Why don’t you just say “fuck your resistance” with our brand new product!!!
               * See Invisibility (scroll): There are a lot of ways to do this...but when you need it...you need it. So it’s nice to have it.
               * Rope Trick (wizard/wand): So this spells is a weird case because it is Valuable but not Versatile….BUT if you are using it you probably want to use it every night. So why not have it as a spell known? Well we ONLY use it at night...that’s it. It’s just shelter which...we can get a lot of other ways. So either let the wizard, who only has to burn 1 spell slot, do this, or just get a wand and hope for the best.
               * Make Whole (scroll): Sometimes you are going to have to fix things, not break them. This is good for that!
	________________
