# 8th Level Spells

8th Level Spells
	Control
	                                             * Maze: Alright Roll SR...did you succeed? Okay uhhh this is just sorta lose. We skipped the save part. Unless they have a massive intelligence, insane luck, or plane shift they are kinda just...stuck there...and that's hilarious.
                                             * Prismatic Wall: Walls of fuck you. Nothing gets through this shit and its hilarous, and if you try to get through it you’ll probably fucking die. I love it, its hilarious and its powered by the gays, LETS GO.
                                             * Wall of Lava (also Blast): Create a very difficult to permeate wall that comes with a move action fire cannon that has 0 SR. This is honestly just a fucking fun spell. Just be careful with that cannon attack, because it’ll shrink your defenses.
	Buff
	                                             * Undead Anatomy IV (also Protection): YAY MORE DR. YAY MORE RESISTANCES. YAY INCORPREALITY!!! YAYYYYY TEMPLATE BASED SPOOK POWERS WOOOO.
                                             * Form of the Dragon III (also Protection/Blast): Jeeessuusss...okay. This is just...wow fuck okay. +10 Str, +8 Con, +8 Natural Armor, FLY 120, Blindsense 60, Darkvision 120, DR 10/magic, Frightening Presence, and IMMUNITY to whatever element you would have been resistant too along with a fuckton of natural attacks and HUGE size. On top of ALL OF THAT your breath weapon now has infinite use (albiet with a 1d4 round cooldown) does 12d8 damage, and is either a 50 ft cone or 100ft line….AND WE CAN STILL CAST SPELLS. You are Dragonborn!! Dovahkiin!!!!
                                             * Form of The Exotic Dragon III (also Blast/Protection): As Above but with access to Primal Dragons.
                                             * Form of The Alien Dragon III (also Blast/Protection): As Above but with access to Esoteric Dragons. 
                                             * ✰Polymorph Any Object✰ (also Utility): Remember everything good I said about greater polymorph? This applies but now with INSANE duration...actually insane like wtf. Turn anything basically into anything else, fuck the law of equvilaent exchange. It’s REALLY REALLY easy to cast this once and make INCREDIBLE BUFFS, that remember used to mainly be personal, now be wideshared, and last WEEKS if not forever. This spell is dumb as fuck and I love it and I’m sure you could do thousands of cheesy things with it but like...It’s just a great spell that you should have.
                                             * Giant Form II (also Protection): “Seid ihr das Essen? Nein wir sind die Jäger!” So the main boon of this spell and its lower version that I did not include is that you can get Regeneration 5 (which means even if you die you aren’t killed) and this form get’s immunities. Is it good? Yes. Does this beat becoming a fucking dragon god or having all of the transformation power forever? Not a chance in hell buster...but it’s cool if you are into this sort of thing.
	Debuff
	                                             * Greater Bestow Curse: Bestow curse but somehow even worse for whoever gets bapped! It’s a touch attack will save (w/sr) but if you get through all the bullshit (hey remember project image?) then this is a horrific way of just destroying a monster. -8 to all saves forever or 25% chance to even have a turn is awful.
                                             * Euphoric Tranquility: Pacifism touch! No save, but it does have SR...but if you get it off (again...project image) you basically get someone who is dedicated to helping and working things out for the duration. Just smack a guy with LSD and he just seems so fucking happy to help :D.
                                             * Sunburst (also Blast): BIG BANG ATTACK!!!! 80ft radius is fucking insane, and if your enemies don’t have SR, its reflect save or blind the entire opposing side...which basically makes them sitting ducks. This is even WORSE if an unfortunate amount of shadows or other light sensitive creatures are involved...they just get straight up get nuked.
                                             * Dimensional Lock (Also Utility): Roll SR...if you win no one in a 20ft radius (jesus) can teleport, which, at this level, is actually kinda a huge problem. How long does this last? Oh just a bit of time...1 day per level. Yeah. Congrats now you can bring in that balor for torturing just like you’ve always wanted I guess.
	Blast
	                                             * Horrid Wilting: This is the anti army spell. No..I’m serious. This can fucking destroy an army. It’s Fort Save (w/ SR) but like….evvverryyone in this INSANE area of effect is hit with at least 16d6 damage, so long as it’s something not undead or animated. Like this is TERRIFYING.
                                             * Stormbolts (also Debuff): “Vanish with the roar of thunder...” So basically Reflex Save (w/ SR) and drop lightning all around you. You can choose who gets hit and who doesn’t. IF they fail their save, they are also stunned for one round.
	Summons
	                                             * Planar Binding Greater: Bind and control everything short of the gods themselves...and even they aren’t entirely off limits if you are willing to put in a little extra effort. This is obviously an amazing spell. This obviously trumps almost any other spell you could take (yes even 9th level) because if you succeed you can bind creatures far beyond your power level and use them to become stronger than anyone could hope to imagine.

If you are going to use this, talk to your DM, make it a thing that you both enjoy. If not, skip it, because again, this can and will SHATTER any semblance of the idea of balance.
                                             * Summon Monster VIII: This is okay. It’s not bad but at this level, every spell you cast should be DEVASTATING. This...this is good but we can do better.
	Utility
	                                                * ✰Greater Shadow Evocation✰: ALL SORC/WIZ EVOCATION SPELLS OF 7TH LEVEL OR LOWER? Contingency? Fair game. I don’t need to explain why this is an insanely powerful ability we can get access to. We want it. We need it. More spell power is more spell power.
                                                * Discern Location: Have you seen it before? Ever? You know it’s name, phone number, physical and IP address, social security and email password. Save nah. SR nah. If you don’t have mind blank? I know where the fuck you are. Welcome to Skynet Bitch.
                                                * Mind Blank: The power of the ultimate arcane VPN. There is no roll, there is no save. Divination spells or devices cannot detect you. See invisibility? Catches nothing. Detect alignment? None of your business. Scrying? I’m off the grid. You also get a +8 resistance bonus to anything mind effecting and honestly thats just the fucking cherry on top. For the next 24 hours? You are Anonymous.
	Protection
	                                                * Seamantle: It basically looks like this. Anyway, references aside, the main benefit is that you are basically treated as being underwater and have improved cover, for a free +8 to ac that stacks with basically everything.
                                                * Repulse (Experimental Wordcaster): The ultimate fuck off spell. Missiles won't hit you, if a person can’t fly, they can’t approach (unless you fail your SR roll…). Even for an 8th level spell, this is amazing...oh also if you burn a meta word, all of your friends are immune. Enjoy being god. It’s a nice feeling. 
                                                * Greater Angelic Aspect (also Buff): Okay this actually can give Form of the Dragon a run for its money! Darkvision, DR10/Evil Only, Immunity to Cold, Acid, AND petrification, resistance 10 to fire AND electricity, protective aura (which is a free +4 to saves and Ac against evil attacks and spells, magic circle against evil AND lesser globe of invulnerability), truespeech, a 60ft fly speed….JEEZZZ. Look if you aren’t trying to be offensive with your new form? This is a GREAT defensive buff.
	8th Lvl Alt Sources
	                                                * Clone (scroll): Congrats on never having to roll a new character sheet again, just make sure you have backups of important items...BUT HEY better for you because you don’t have a spellbook to replace :D You just come back and become a problem INSTANTLY.
                                                * Create Demiplane (scroll): Create super sick realm. Again, great spell, very versatile, incredibly expensive, we love it, we want it, it’s our right as growing deities but like….it’s a downtime spell.
	________________
