# Archetypes

Archetypes


In the APG, UM, and UC books, I really disliked all of the Archetypes they added for Wizard. If it weren’t for the adventure paths, this would be just a “Prof_Q bashes ACFs” section. There are however some decent options in other sources besides the Core+ sources, so it’s worth checking some of them out. 


Arcane Bomber: What is so great about the Alchemist Bomb ability that it’s worth FOUR OPPOSITION SCHOOLS!? … ahem... doing this without Bias...
Okay, so you trade your Arcane Bond for the Alchemist’s Bomb ability, but you can’t add discoveries to them which is the only reason the Alchemist’s Bomb ability is any good at all. To top it off, you’re locked into a single energy type, so it becomes worthless against some of the enemies you’ll inevitably run into. The Familiar is better. The Item Bond is better. So far, so bad.
Second, you give up ALL of your Cantrips so you can Sacrifice Spells -- Alright, this is already a double negative -- So you can sacrifice spells to add twice the spell level to your bombs as... damage. Wow. So a level 9 spell sacrificed adds 18 damage? And now you have to cast detect magic as a 1st level spell?
…
Sorry I just woke up from my mind snapping at the stupidity. No offense to anyone who’s done this Archetype.
Finally these abilities that I mentioned are SO AWESOME that you don’t get to have a specialization school. This means you don’t get extra spells per day, and you get to pick 4 opposition schools to boot.
Do I even need to say anything about how bad a deal this is? Sure the damage is relatively high, but it’s one-type, and you have ½ BAB progression making you awful at lobbing them. This option is so inferior I almost want to turn all of this text red.


Scrollmaster: Okay, you give up your Familiar, which is potentially extra actions every round (amazing!) or you give up Item Bond, which has incredible versatility, for the ability to wield a piece of paper as a weapon using your ½ BAB progression. In addition, the weapons disintegrate as you use them, destroying the increasingly expensive scrolls you might use for this piece of paper weapon. It does get an enhancement bonus to help you hit, but any smart fighter is going to have weapons with enhancement bonuses WITH their full BAB progression. You can give also your scrolls reach. That’s cool but still not redeeming by any means.
Being able to turn the scroll into a shield is more useful, and doesn’t seem to replace anything more. It still gradually disintegrates, but that’s only if you’re getting hit, which the scroll expressly helps against. Using it as a shield sort of redeems the ridiculousness of the first part of this Archetype. And it’s actually not completely terrible as you level up. The bummer part of it is that it only gets ½ the scroll’s spell level. The normal Arcane Bond is still better, but the shield part of this makes a little more than useless.
Improved Scroll Casting helps make this archetype a lot better. You can start writing down scrolls that you can use in combat and actually have them use decent DCs when casting them. Wait... why are you using scrolls in combat? And why do DCs matter, you should be using scrolls for situational utility! What’s wrong with you!
Actually I can think of some instances that pulling out a circumstantial scroll in combat might be helpful. Banishment comes to mind as something you wouldn’t be memorizing every day, but definitely want it to have as high a DC as you can give it.
The level 10 ability is a good benefit of this Archetype, but it’s a pretty expensive feat.


Seige Mage: Oh goodness... I’m having flashbacks to Arcane Bomber. But this is only 3 schools lost... can’t be as bad. Actually it’s pretty bad losing the extra spell per day as well as taking the opposition schools. But I digress, what does this Archetype do for us?
First thing is that you lose the ability to scribe scrolls for proficiency in Siege Weapons. That sounds like a cool trade for manly people. Siege weapons turn out to be not too bad. They are great for toppling buildings, which is the point I guess. Indirect Fire weapons use your Intelligence to fire, and that’s a wonderful thing for your poor to-hit. So go figure, siege weapons are great for Wizards.
The next benefit of this Archetype is the ability to remote control siege weapons within 30’, later not even needing a crew to reload the weapon. This is strangely awesome. You lose your arcane bond for this, and I’m not sure the remote control aspect is really that useful since it still takes all of your actions to utilize the machine. I guess you could hide in a tiny hut while you make your Nightrider car do all the busy work.
The next ability makes you give up cantrips so you can sacrifice spells... oh goodness. Yeah, it’s basically the same thing as the Arcane Bomber’s ability except it buffs your to-hit and does more damage.
This archetype could have been cool, but like the many aquatic archetypes out there for other classes, this archetype is very campaign specific. Even in those campaign circumstances I don’t think it’s a very optimized choice either. I just don’t think losing your spells per day is worth it at all.


Spellslinger: Another one that has 4 opposition schools and doesn’t get bonus spells. You see why I hate these Archetypes?
However, this one actually sort of works because Guns are all touch attacks. You don’t get as many multiple attacks through your guns as a more martial class, but you can add your gun’s enhancement modifier to your Spell’s DCs for certain kinds of spells. Rime Cone of Cold, or Dazing Lighting Bolt comes to mind for this.  
Mage Bullets is bad not only because your sacrificing powerful spells for a moderate effect, but it also gives an enhancement bonus that won’t stack with any permanent enchantments you’ve put on your gun.
Ultimately this option is still bad because the payoff isn’t as good as the costs, but it takes a slightly better direction than the other two similar options. Adding a +5 to your spell DC for a 3 turn Daze effect is a pretty good trick.


Primalist: (ISM) If you hate your familiar (you shouldn’t) the first level power of this archetype actually seems like it’s a trade-off you get something out of. Essentially it gives you 5 extra spell slots by level 20 as long as you can make the concentration check when you cast. Naturally this means you’re going to want combat casting as a Blue Feat, as well as any traits you can get to make this better. If you take this and combat casting at first level while maxing your intelligence, your odds of success with a first level spell are about 40%. It’s about 50% if you can get one of the +2 concentration traits, so I’d recommend considering this Archetype only when you can have traits. Even then the 50% odds aren’t very acceptable, but I personally like Random things like Primal Magic Events (PME), it makes the game interesting and I personally would still think about taking this Archetype.
Besides, the rest of the powers of the Archetype are about improving your odds when you trigger the PME. Probably not the most optimal Archetype, but it’s certainly a fun one that doesn’t insult your intelligence with nonsense Wizards should never be doing.


Scroll Scholar: (PSFG) Interestingly, this requires the base Diviner specialization or the Universalist specialization, so it almost works like a subschool as much as it does an Archetype. Obviously Diviner is the better choice of the two.
You trade your minor buff power or your telekinetic weapon power for what’s basically lesser bardic knowledge. Considering that you have to be a Wizard to pick this archetype, I’m not sure why it has to say the knowledge skill becomes a class skill - I guess it’s a provision for multiclassing?
The 5th level replacement feat gives you spell like abilities for some okay spells. It fits the flavor of the scholar, and will save you some spell slots on the minor utility the granted spells provide. It’s worth the feat it replaces as far as value is concerned, especially since it grows as you level up. Comprehend Languages as a permanency costs 2,500 gp. Identify can’t normally be made permanent, but since it’s basically improved detect magic, it’s worth at least 2,500 gp as well.
The final power is also good. Being an immediate action it is worth more than the 4th level slot it replaces as a Diviner, because the spells you could be casting in that slot aren’t all phenomenal anyway (Well... Arcane Eye is cool.) What’s important though is that as an immediate action you will be using it more often, and you eventually get more uses of it per day than another 4th level slot would give.
Overall I’d say this is a great choice if you go Diviner, though not as good as going Foresight with the base Diviner school. I guess what I’m trying to say is that if this fits your character concept - a Scholarly know-it-all who is a master linguist and knows what every artifact in the world is - this is a very good option.
I don’t recommend doing this as a Universalist because I don’t recommend Universalist in general.


Shadow Caster: (ISM) This one is interesting. The ability to prepare extra spells in your shadow is similar to Item bond in that it gives you extra spells, but without the versatility.  I’m going to say it’s worse than Item Bond, mainly because the biggest attraction of Item Bond is being able to pull that one really odd spell out when you really need it. That said, the Shadow does not have the drawback if you happen to lose your item. Instead it has the drawback of forcing your DM to tell you what lighting you’re in. Considering that you have limited control of lighting as a Wizard though this shouldn’t be a huge problem.
Permanent Darkvision is nice, but comparing it to just casting permanency it makes your feat about 5,000 gold. That makes it reminiscent of the Scroll Scholar’s 5th level replacement feat. It’s only okay, in my opinion. At level 9 if you want Darkvision as any other kind of Wizard, you can just fork out the gold. In my experience, because almost every class that casts has light, most DMs I’ve played with barely pay attention to lighting conditions unless a spell is cast. However, combined with antics related to Tenebrous Spell and Umbral spell, I’d say that something that gives you permanent darkvision is necessary.
The ability to cast more real shadow spells is quite interesting, but I don’t think it’s terribly good. Shades seems like a versatile spell, but it’s only Wizard conjuration spells, and basically you’re changing a 9th level slot for a lower level spell. Unlike other similar spells like Miracle, it doesn’t give you access to a huge variety of spells that you couldn’t just be casting with your lower level slots anyway. Extra damage on Shadow Evocation and Conjuration is also lackluster. Honestly I think I’d rather have the feat.
   Overall, I’d say the Shadow Caster has an semi-interesting replacement for your item bond, one decent feat replacement, and one pretty lackluster replacement. The problem with Shadow spells isn’t that they are partially real, but that they mimic powers that are already less relevant at the spell slot you’re casting them at.


Spell Binder: (ARG: Elf) This is a popular option and as such I feel like I need to use a few more words to describe my feeling on this than I would normally. The idea is very nice, but when you start breaking it down it’s really not better than the item bond than the Familiar. 
This power lets you have one set spell per spell level that you can use to replace one of your memorized spells by spending a full round action. So that begs the question: Why would you want to do that? The obvious answer is so that you can spend your time memorizing a variety of things but then have your more used spells on standby. The issue I have with Spellbinder is that since you have a limited number of spells you can choose for swap out (A total of nine) you’re going to be picking spells you’d want to cast all the time. Since you want to cast them all the time the first spells that come to mind are things like Haste or Telekinetic Charge – you know, the kind you use in combat all the time. But if you don’t already have it memorized, Spellbinder requires you to waste a turn to get it memorized. You could easily grab Heighten Spell and Preferred Spell for that spell you cast all the time, and then you don’t have to worry about bankrupting the action economy. For that matter, if you pick Item Bond, you can cast any spell that you know. Item bond gives you an extra casting for the day – it doesn’t mess with your existing memorizations. It seems to me that there are better ways to get the spells you need when you need it in a timely matter.
So then, from a rational optimization standpoint, the best kind of spell that you would want with your Spellbinder are the kind that you don’t cast all the time, but may need in a contingency. You know, things like Teleport. But do you know what that starts sounding like? Scrolls. And of course you could also get Fast Study and then leave some slots open. It’s ten times longer to do it that way but losing a round in combat is pretty harmful so in either case I would recommend doing it out of combat for Utility spells. Lots of substitutes for either use of Spellbinder making me think that I’d rather have the more unique Familiar or Item Bond.
I’m not saying Spellbinder is a completely poor choice. Maybe you don’t want to deal with the accounting of the Familiar and maybe you don’t want to take the risk with Item Bond. That’s fine. Take Spellbinder in that case. I just don’t think it’s as good as the regular Arcane Bond options in general. 
And hey, you can even get your cake and eat it too. Someone on the forums recommended getting Eldritch Heritage to get your Arcane bond back with the Arcane Bloodline. That costs two feats and a 13 Charisma, and some of the recommendations I gave to duplicate Spellbinder take at least two feats, so that’s not so bad a deal (Though achieving 13 Charisma might be a bit expensive.) 
I think spellbinder sits quite solidly as an Orange option. It’s “okay.” 


Cruoromancer: (ARG: Dhampir) Okay, the Dhampir doesn’t make a very good Wizard in the first place, but I’ll try not to let that influence my opinion here in case your DM lets you take this Archetype without the race.
Blood infusion – with the first level powers – isn’t very good. There aren’t enough really awesome saving-throw based necromancy spells to really get a lot of benefit out of the bonus to Necromancy DCs (The best of Necromancy barely relies on DCs.) And sickened for 1 round isn’t really worth the self inflicted damage, although it does seem like the sickening is automatic – it doesn’t allow for a saving throw. Not worth giving up your Arcane Bond.
The 5th level feat replacement is actually not too bad if you’re making an undead army. It doesn’t reduce the cost of the minions though, so essentially the infusion aspect part of the feat just makes it take less time and fewer spell slots to raise your army. The passive modification of what you can control at a given level is a measurable increase in power. This feat is good.
The 10th level feat doesn’t seem worth it. The Desecration only boosts the attack, damage, and saving throw rolls by +1, which is a relatively small amount by level 10. Granted it’s a little more effective the more creatures you are controlling that benefit from it. It is nice that you can pull it off as a swift action though, and it does have a good duration.
Blood ability is kind of cool, but by level 15 you have a ton of scouting abilities. I think it’s a little late to the party, and I don’t think it’s worth a feat. 
By level 20 when you can use infusions without taking damage the damage is as minor as it’s going to get. I don’t think it’s worth losing your level 9 slot for it, or your feat for that matter. 
Overall I think this Archetype has one decent ability mixed with a bunch of lacklustre ones. As usual, I’m going to say that you should probably be a divine caster if you’re going to be a necromancer, they just get more benefits from the stats you need. 
 
Wind Listener: (ARG: Sylph) Perception as a class skill. Nice. 
Spontaneous casting of Divination Spells is also cool. Similar to spellbinder it takes a full round action to cast spells this way, but you actually cast the spell when you do this. Is this worth giving up Arcane Bond? Well, divination spells can be notoriously circumstantial though and this lets you fill your spellbook up with otherwise worthless spells so you can have them ready for the very specific occasion they were made for. I think this is a good deal. 
The 5th level feat is a little weird and I don’t think it’s worth that much. Some of the trap spells are abjuration, but many times the trap is enhanced with a spell from another school, like Evocation. The feat is oddly specific.
Whispy Form is pretty cool and probably worth the feat. 
The 15th level feat can also be very useful for gathering information (Diviners are good at that.) Not really worth a feat when you can just memorize Legend Lore yourself though.
Overall I think this Archetype has some good things at the sacrifice of two basically wasted feats. I think it could easily have been at least green if it weren’t for that.  
________________
