# Class Weaknesses

Class Weaknesses


* They’re perpetually starved for feats. The problem with being able to fill many roles is that your feats only allow you to be really good in one, maybe two roles. When it comes to feats, Occultists have to follow that age-old acronym KISS: Keep It Simple, Stupid. (Or Keep It Stupidly Simple if you’d rather not self-denigrate. I’m proud of you.) Precisely what that stupidly simple loadout looks like will vary from build to build, but you should always aim to have the core elements of your build finished in about three feats. See the Occultist Roles section for more information.
* They’ll never have enough mental focus. For an Occultist, the world runs on mental focus: you use it to fuel your focus powers, you use it to fuel your resonant powers, and once it’s gone, the music stops and everyone goes home. I can’t recommend the elf or halfling favored class bonuses enough, because they considerably alleviate the mental focus crunch. Halflings don’t make fabulous Occultists, but elves and half-elves definitely have the goods.
* They don’t have great “casting variety.” Other casting classes are free not to pay any attention to what school of magic their spells come from; Occultists aren’t so lucky. In exchange for your long-term superiority in spells known, you have to pick all the spells associated with a particular implement from just one implement school. If it’s an illusion implement, you’re getting only illusion spells; if it’s evocation, only evocation. The trouble with this mechanic is that spells from the same schools tend to be kinda “same-y” as far as what you can do with them. Abjuration protects you, evocation blasts stuff, divination gets you information, etc. There are exceptions, of course, but in general you’re not going to be able to conjure an illusion with an evocation implement or melt face with an abjuration implement. This is where UMD really has to shine for you…
* ...but UMD won’t shine until the mid-levels. This one really does stink, because UMD is hugely important for Occultists. Even with your class skill (+3), a +5 competence bonus to UMD from a custom magic item costing 2,500 gp (+5), Pragmatic Activator (+4), magic item skill (+3), and ranks (+6), you’re not going to be able to consistently meet the checks to activate wands until about 6th level. Scrolls, which add caster level requirements on top of a DC 20 check, can achieve DCs as high as 40. Since you can’t take 10 on UMD checks, you’ll actually need to boost your skill bonus high enough to hit those DCs even on a Nat 1 if you want to use spell trigger and spell completion items reliably. No small task, certainly, but the payoff is huge if you can swing it.
* Psychic magic is vulnerable to fear and emotion effects. Psychic magic with emotion components ceases to function whenever the Occultist is under the effects of a non-harmless fear or emotion effect. Full rules here. This, as it turns out, is not a trivial weakness. Fear effects are shockingly common among monsters and spell effects, and anything from shaken to cowering will shut you down 100%, a scenario that we in the biz like to call “not good.” Even though Occultists have good Will saves, one layer of defense isn’t enough. I’ll cover psychic casting strategies in the Spells section, but suffice it for now to say that psychic magic is not without its Achilles’ heels, all of which you should have multiple routes of patching or circumventing.
* They have weak Reflex saves and a d8 Hit Die. This is probably the least glaring of an Occultist’s issues, but still something to keep a weather eye on. Constitution scores should never be dropped lower than a 12; leave it at 14 if you can possibly manage it, and consider taking the Toughness feat or invest in the Physical Enhancement resonant power (transmutation implement school) with Constitution if you intend to be a melee combatant. As for Reflex saves, ranged and Dexterity-based melee Occultists will have this more or less covered through their ability scores, but Strength-based melee Occultists who have dumped Dexterity for heavy armor will probably have to come at this problem by using spells or focus powers (resist energy, protection from energy, Energy Shield, etc.) to soak the damage most typically associated with Reflex saves (fireball, breath weapons, etc.) rather than pass their saves outright. Remember that Lightning Reflexes is always an option, too.


________________
