# Class Strengths

Class Strengths


* It’s a true Swiss Army Knife of a class. I mentioned this above, but Occultists can be built to achieve anything you want them to achieve, ranging from full casting to full martial combat and everything in between. Your choice of implement schools and archetype will matter the most in building an Occultist—and these elements are set in stone once you choose them—but careful selection at the macro level can allow you to fill nearly any role under the sun.
* Focus powers are incredibly strong and flexible. Depending on an Occultist’s implement schools (more on those later) they’ll have access to a bunch of focus powers. Sometimes these act as carbon copies of spells (fly, enlarge person, haste, etc.) but other times they mimic or even improve on other classes’ key abilities—Legacy Weapon from the transmutation implement school gives you an improved version of the Magus’ arcane pool ability, for instance, or Combat Trick from Trappings of the Warrior can act as a limited version of the Brawler’s martial flexibility feature. Focus powers rule the school. Obviously only use the best of the best, both in terms of cost and effect, and don’t use any buffs when you’re in an easier fight that can be handled without them; Occultists will always be low on mental focus, and it won’t do to burn through it like there’s no tomorrow.
* They can flex into different roles depending on where mental focus gets invested every day, or even give away their implements to other party members. Occultists will never be quite as flexible in their roles on a day-to-day basis as Shaman, Wizards, etc., but they can often amplify their own suitedness to a particular role through resonant powers—passive abilities that dramatically improve one element of an Occultist’s function. If you need to be an occult spy one day, mapping out entire dungeons, toss a bunch of mental focus in a divination implement, and you’re there. If you need to be a tough-as-nails melee combatant, throw everything into abjuration and transmutation and watch the enemies fall. You can even loan out resonant powers to allies by giving them their implements! A Juju Oracle with a fully charged necromancy implement will be way better at controlling undead, a fireball blasting build on a Wizard or Sorcerer will rock that much harder with an evocation implement, a Bard can outperform at the dinner party with an enchantment implement, etc.
* They have the option for full BAB progression. Even though Occultists are technically ¾-BAB ⅔ casters, same as Inquisitors, Warpriests, Bards, Hunters, Magi, etc., Occultists are unique in that they can become full-BAB combatants through the Trappings of the Warrior panoply while retaining their ⅔ casting. Casting spells as a ⅔ caster while also fighting as a full-BAB class is a huge benchmark in power that very few combat-oriented Occultists will want to ignore.
* They have great weapon and armor proficiencies, with no spell failure chance. Occultists are proficient with simple weapons and martial weapons, as well as light armor, medium armor, and shields. Great! That’s more than enough to be getting on with, and keeps you reasonably safe throughout the game. Heavy armor proficiency is always an option that you can pursue, especially because psychic magic features no spell failure chance from armor.
* They have strong Fortitude and Will saves. Don’t sleep on this fact! Fortitude and Will are by far the two most important saves in the game, and a strong progression in both automatically makes you much sturdier against extraordinary, supernatural, and spell effects than you otherwise would have been.
* They’re psychic casters, with all the subtlety and advantages that type of casting confers. Psychic casting has no verbal or somatic components, making you a force to be reckoned with even while silenced or grappled. What’s more, since you don’t have to flail your arms or loudly declaim incantations, people are unlikely even to know you’re a caster unless you do something incredibly obvious like start flying. Psychic casting comes with its own disadvantages, of course, but we’ll get to those later.
* They learn 9 more spells known over the course of their careers than other ⅔ casters, and they always enter each new spell level with a bunch of spells known. This benefit may not be immediately obvious unless you’re really comparing and contrasting classes, but Occultists learn a total of 49 spells (7 implements x 7 spell levels) over the course of their careers. Other ⅔ casters, by contrast, learn only 40 spells (6 spells from 0 to 4th level, then 5 spells from 5th to 6th level). Occultists can’t cast any spells other than the 49 they know without passing difficult UMD checks, of course, so this isn’t an apples-to-apples comparison, but it’s still worth noting. What’s more, the way that implement schools store spells means that you always start a new spell level with a bunch of spells known. A 7th-level Bard just gaining access to 3rd-level spells wants to learn arcane concordance, charm monster, dispel magic, displacement, glibness, good hope, haste, major image, purging finale, wall of nausea, and on and on, but only gets 2 spells known at 7th level; Occultists, because they have 4 implement schools by this point, start with 4 spells known. Even though Occultists are a little slow off the starting block from 1st through 3rd levels, they’ve essentially caught up by 4th and have started to surpass other ⅔ casters by 7th level. Once you get past 10th, the advantage the Occultist holds in their spellcasting almost isn’t funny. I’ve illustrated this point in the table near the spells section, “Spells Known: ⅔ Casting Classes and Occultists.”
* They have great UMD skills. Even though other ⅔ casters can cast spells off their own spell lists much more easily than Occultists can, Occultists also get some serious boosts to their UMD checks that can lead to them being able to use dang near any scroll, wand, or staff in the game by about 6th level. Their natural advantage in spells known at higher levels combined with this “critical mass” of UMD bonuses all starts to hit its inflection point in the 7th to 10th level range, when you’ll feel the weight of Occultists’ implement schools, focus powers, resonant powers, and spells all start to outstrip what other ⅔ casters are capable of. It’s a cool moment.




________________
