# Compound Longbow (DEX)

Compound Longbow (DEX)


        Compound longbows are like the lightsabers of the Pathfinder universe: elegant weapons for an uncivilized age. They’re also incredibly powerful, enabling you to use feats like Rapid Shot, Manyshot, Improved Precise Shot, and more to pummel enemies from afar. In addition to being better on offense than many melee builds, ranged builds also tend to be more survivable than many melee builds because they’re able to stay well away from enemies. Not to mention that you get all the bonuses associated with Dexterity as your primary attack stat! Wonderful indeed, right? Well, for every rainbow in Pathfinder, there’s a cloud, and ranged combat is no exception. The primary limitation with ranged builds is that they’re incredibly feat intensive. You’ll need Point-Blank Shot and Precise Shot to even be able to function as a ranged character without constantly missing, plus Improved Precise Shot at higher levels to let you shoot through cover. Then, of course, you’ll need Rapid Shot, Manyshot, and Deadly Aim to boost damage. If you’d like not to provoke an attack of opportunity for firing your bow, you’ll need Point-Blank Master, and the ability to threaten enemies with your bow has to be bought back through Snap Shot and Improved Snap Shot. For classes that get a lot of bonus feats—Zen Archer Monks, Rangers, Fighters, Slayers—this isn’t a huge deal. For little old Occultists, though, you bet your sweet bippy it’s going to be difficult to work all those feats in.


        I wish I had better news for you about how to build a ranged Occultist, but it’s a tough row to hoe. Occultists get no bonus feats, and due to the way their implement schools work, Occultists are punished even more harshly than other ⅔ casters for dipping away from their base class. My basic recommendation is to allocate your attributes as you usually would for a ranged character, DEX, INT > STR > CON, WIS > CHA, then stick with only the basic feat requirements: Point-Blank Shot, Precise Shot, Rapid Shot. That’s it. You can obviously decide to stack on more at a later date if you like (Manyshot is always good, and Deadly Aim is a must if you’re going with Trappings of the Warrior) but you’ve got to focus on the core chassis before anything else. Ranged combat tends to be a somewhat binary “This is working” vs. “This really isn’t working” affair, and I want you to fall firmly into the first camp. If your party is playing with Elephant in the Room feat tax rules, that ruleset makes Point-Blank Shot more or less optional, which is fantastic for ranged Occultists, who wouldn’t take it if they had the choice. Oh, one last pointer: it’s helpful to think about how you’re going to allocate your physical stat enhancement bonuses on a ranged build. Your physical stat belt will give you permanent bonuses, so you should likely assign your belt to Dexterity when you’ve got enough money for one. That still leaves you with the Physical Enhancement resonant power from transmutation, though, and my recommendation would be to sink that into Strength. Compound bows are an easy way to boost damage as a ranged character, but most classes can’t pump Strength without tanking Dexterity a little; Occultists don’t have to make that tradeoff. Make sure to add the adaptive enchantment to your bow for 1,000 gp when you can so that your compound damage bonus scales up and down with buffs, ability damage, and Physical Enhancement. There’s nothing worse than taking a few points of ability damage or drain and realizing you suddenly can’t use the weapon you’ve spent all your money and feats on being able to use effectively.


        As far as combat flow goes, ranged builds are even simpler than melee builds. Stand back, then keep full-attacking until all the enemies are gone. What’s that, you say? Not enough detail? Well, because I can’t help but give, I’ll give you some more. Because ranged builds don’t have to focus their entire being on survivability, other schools of magic apart from abjuration and transmutation start to come into focus a bit. Conjuration and evocation, for example, have multiple high-quality battlefield control spells that would be great on a ranged build; many feature no save and are perfect for walling off a boss from its minions or vice versa. Necromancy eventually lets you use possession and greater possession to hop into enemies’ bodies for a while, and although possession is a bit risky mid-combat because it leaves your insensate body lying on the ground for anyone to coup de grace, it’s at least safer to perform such a maneuver on the back line. Regardless of your other implement schools, though, abjuration, transmutation, and Trappings of the Warrior still reign supreme for combat builds, even ranged ones. You want full BAB unless there’s an extraordinarily compelling reason not to pursue it, and effects like shield, bullet shield, reduce person, thaumaturgic circle, fly, haste, echolocation, Quickness, Aegis, Legacy Weapon, and Mind Over Gravity are all as wonderful for ranged characters as they are for melee characters. Fly to a good height, partition the battlefield, adjust with self-buffs like echolocation or see invisibility if you need to deal with casters, and then shine down on ‘em with the patented Occultist death ray. Wawawawawa.


Pros
	Cons
	Deadly, deadly, deadly. Between Rapid Shot, Manyshot, and Quickness/haste, ranged Occultists will get a...let’s see, I believe the technical term is “metric stink tonne” of attacks, and full-attack actions are a lot more feasible when you can let your arrows do the moving, rather than having to hoof it to each new target. Each attack stacks damage in a way that is pleasing to me on a spiritual level.
	Feats, feats, feats. Oy gevalt iz mir. Yes, ranged builds need a metric stink tonne of feats to generate their metric stink tonne of attacks, and all of those have to be taken on a class with no bonus feats to help out. Consider playing a human, bribing or coercing your GM into playing with Elephant in the Room feat tax rules, or potentially dipping a level of Fighter.
	Less multiple attribute-dependent than other builds. With lower chances of getting hit at range and no need to pump Strength to the moon, ranged builds are free to focus on Dexterity and Intelligence, both of which have immediate and outstanding effects for Occultists.
	More limited by terrain and positioning. Because of the way that cover bonuses work, ranged characters need to have strategies in place to deal with walls, fogs or mists, soft cover, and more mundane and supernatural obstacles. Self-buffs like fly or ashen path can deal with a lot of this, as can focus powers like Mind Over Gravity or Side Step.
	More survivability. Ranged combatants tend to get attacked less than melee combatants, mostly because they’re harder to reach. You’ll still want to keep effects like bullet shield, resist energy, shield, mirror image, displacement, planar aegis, and thaumaturgic circle around to defend yourself and prevent enemies from getting up in your business effectively.
	

	Easier to find racial stat bonuses. Strength bonuses are a little hard to find in the Pathfinder races, but Dexterity bonuses are as common as dirt. Dexterity/Intelligence is a particularly popular pairing—perfect for these builds.
