# OCC 101: Opinions on Occultists

OCC 101: Opinions on Occultists


        I typically like to spend the early parts of my guides defining how Paizo intended for their classes to be played, based on the raw mechanics given to each class. In some cases, the most important decisions you make for your character will be made at 1st level—bloodlines, mysteries, and elements pretty much define what Sorcerers, Oracles, and Kineticists are going to do (for the most part) right at Session 0. In some cases, the character’s role evolves as they gain access to talents, discoveries, etc., like the Rogue, Investigator, Vigilante, or Alchemist classes. Some classes, like the Wizard, Cleric, Druid, or Shaman, simply refuse to be pinned down at all, and maintain their flexibility throughout their lifespan. I can honestly say, however, that the Occultist is unique among Pathfinder classes in many ways, and it often fails to conform to these “categories” of class designs—sometimes to its detriment, but mostly to its benefit.


        Although Occultists can’t flex into different roles quite as effectively as Wizards, Clerics, Druids, Shaman, and other prepared full casters can, I genuinely can’t think of another class that can be built to be literally anything you want in the same way the Occultist can. Want a full arcane caster? Boom, Silksworn. Want an infiltration specialist? Babow, Performer’s Accoutrements. Full-BAB martial monster wielding a greatsword and heavy armor? Yep, Trappings of the Warrior has you covered. Master of undead minions? Necroccultist and the necromancy implement school can have you rocking 160 HD of animated undead at 20th level. Occult spy? Easy enough with Mind Eye and riding possession. And if you don’t want to build for anything in particular, the Occultist is the ultimate jack-of-all-trades class, using its focus powers and implement schools to do just about anything you need it to do. Lots of players get intimidated by the occult classes and put off learning about them, but it’s my goal to take that fear away! The Occultist is a truly cool class that everyone deserves to understand and love, because it returns on your investments in a major way. Let’s dive into what makes the class strong, and also try to pick out where its weaknesses are.
