# OCC 240: Spells

OCC 240: Spells


        One of the coolest parts about being an Occultist is that, while their spell choices are restricted by which implement schools they selected, they actually get more spells known than any other ⅔ caster, a fact that’s illustrated in the table below comparing ⅔ casters’ spells known to Occultists’ spells known. It’s also true that Occultists can’t cast spells that are nominally on their class list with wands and scrolls as easily as other classes, but this again turns out to be a bit of a blessing in disguise: thanks to Occultists’ huge bonuses to UMD, you’ll eventually be able to cast spells off your own spell list at no chance of failure, and once that happens, you can cast spells off of anyone’s spell list with no chance of failure. A 6th-level Occultist who’s finally hit that magic +19 to UMD won’t just be able to use wands of spells from the Occultist spell list—they’ll also be able to use wands of spells off the Bard, Inquisitor, Wizard, and Paladin spell lists. It takes a while to get there, but you do in the end.
        The other thing to note is that Occultists are psychic casters, not arcane or divine casters. Where arcane and divine spells have somatic and verbal components that require you to declaim incantations loudly and wave your arms, psychic casting happens entirely in the mind. Psychic casting is therefore much more resilient to effects like grapples and silence than arcane or divine casting are. It comes with a price, however: psychic casting requires thought components, which impose a -10 penalty on concentration checks made to cast defensively unless you take a move action to “center yourself,” and emotion components, which cannot be provided while the Occultist is under the effects of a non-harmless fear or emotion effect. Thought components are generally easy to avoid, as a move action is typically not too difficult to provide when you’re casting defensively unless you’re trying to cast a metamagic-enhanced spell while threatened, in which case a jewel of centering will be a great purchase for you; emotion components, on the other hand, are trouble. Pathfinder abounds in fear auras and enchantment spells that can and will put your casting down for the count unless you proactively address the weakness. Both the Core: Defenses portion of the Feats section and the Emotion Components of the Items section will help you do so with panache.
        Every psychic caster should ideally have at least a few layers of defense against fear and emotion effects. The first route is to start with a good Will save. Yes, I know the class’ Will progression is already good, but any minor bumps up to 12 on Wisdom can make your life easier, as can feats like Iron Will. If you’re willing, you can also go hunting for bonuses to saves against mind-affecting effects (which tends to be an umbrella descriptor that encompasses both fear and emotion effects) or fear and emotion effects themselves. While more niche, these bonuses tend to be larger than the ones you’ll find to flat Will saves, so that’s something. Yet another layer of defense that every psychic caster should have is some kind of item that allows them to reduce the severity of fear conditions with repeated saves. Several of these items are available as items, and usually allow you to progress from cowering → panicked → frightened → shaken in successive rounds. It won’t stop you from getting placed under, but it may prevent you from spending 85 rounds running in panic from a dragon if worst comes to worst. Lastly, every psychic caster should have access to the Logical Spell metamagic feat, whether that’s through the feat itself or through a lesser metamagic rod. More severe fear effects won’t let you cast these spells or use the rod as you flee at top speed, but they’re essential for when your casting gets shut down by something like the shaken condition. We want you shaken, as the saying goes, but not stirred.


________________
