# OCC 222: Panoplies

OCC 222: Panoplies


        Panoplies, introduced in Psychic Anthology, are a cool subsystem of the implement school mechanic that (in at least one case) drastically change the way Occultists can be played. The basic idea is that a panoply is a special type of implement school that can only be “purchased” once you’ve unlocked the two or three implement schools associated with that panoply. Think of it like Captain Planet: “When these powers combine…” Every time you select a panoply, you get access to its resonant power and base focus power, just like any other implement school, and unlock a set of focus powers to purchase in the normal way. You also get to pick one spell known from each spell level, although these spells known can come from any school of magic associated with the panoply. Using a panoply focus power draws mental focus from any of the implements associated with the panoply (your choice where it comes from) and the resonant power adds up all the mental focus invested in each of the panoply’s associated implements to determine its effects.
        Let’s look at a quick example. We want to turn our Occultist into a full-BAB martial class with ⅔ casting using the Trappings of the Warrior panoply. The panoply itself can’t be unlocked until we have both an abjuration (shield) implement and a transmutation (weapon) implement, so we take those two schools as our implement schools at 1st level. We’re then free to purchase Trappings of the Warrior using our 2nd-level implement school. A panoply is a set of objects, rather than an object, so we don’t invest any mental focus into Trappings of the Warrior itself; its associated implement schools are abjuration and transmutation, so we put mental focus into our shield and weapon in order to fuel the panoply. At 2nd level, we’ll have an Intelligence of 18, so 6 points of mental focus. We invest 3 points in our shield, and 3 points in our weapon. We get the resonant powers for abjuration and transmutation, same as normal, but we also get the resonant power from Trappings of the Warrior as if we had 6 points of mental focus invested. That’s 3 points in the shield + 3 points in the weapon = 6 in the panoply overall. We can draw mental focus from our implement schools to fuel abjuration and transmutation focus powers, same as normal, but we can also use focus powers from the Trappings of the Warrior, choosing each time we do so whether to draw mental focus from our shield or our weapon. Once the mental focus in all implements associated with the panoply is gone, the panoply’s resonant power stops functioning.
        Oh: one last thing. The panoply rules text states that characters need to “hold” all of the panoply’s implements in order to benefit from its resonant power and focus powers, but this phrasing gets weird when you consider that items like the mask implement from Performer’s Accoutrements or the robe implement from Mage’s Paraphernalia are clearly intended to be worn, not held. Panoplies like Trappings of the Warrior require you to “hold” a shield and a weapon, but it may suffice to wear the shield and weapon on your person, rather than actively wielding them. Wearing the implements on your person is a much more workable option than wielding implements, an option that should be discussed with your GM.
