# Some Conclusions

Some Conclusions


        As with any Pathfinder class, the way that you capitalize on a build’s strengths while shoring up its weaknesses depends on what you’re building the character for, but there are some general takeaways for Occultists that should apply to nearly any build.


* Pick your implement schools, spells, and focus powers very carefully, and in that order. Base Occultists get only seven implement schools from 1st to 20th level, each of which grants only six spells from a single school of magic. Spontaneous casters always have to choose their spells carefully, but Occultists need to choose them very carefully. Truly: only the best of the best will do.
* Keep your basic combat feat requirements extraordinarily simple. Occultists don’t have many feats to begin with, but the problem is compounded because Occultists are trying to fill so many roles. Even if each role only requires one or two feats at a bare minimum to get off the ground, that still adds up quickly when you’re doing five or six things. My golden rule is to never take more than three feats to get your combat chassis up and running: that’ll mean Power Attack, Heavy Armor Proficiency, and possibly Step Up or Lunge for Strength-based melee builds, Weapon Finesse, Weapon Focus, and one of the Dexterity-to-damage feats for Dexterity-based melee builds, and Point-Blank Shot, Precise Shot, and Rapid Shot for ranged builds. 
* Invest the rest of your feats in other areas of critical need, and when in doubt, take Extra Mental Focus. Why keep combat builds simple? Because you’ll need the rest for casting priorities (Combat Casting, Spell Focus, Spell Penetration, Logical Spell, Extend Spell, etc.), focus power priorities (Extra Focus Power, Extra Mental Focus), defensive priorities (Heavy Armor Proficiency, Toughness, Lightning Reflexes, any feat that gives you better defenses against mind-affecting, emotion, or fear effects), and UMD priorities (Extra Traits if you weren’t able to get Pragmatic Activator, Skill Focus: UMD, etc.). Occultists could probably be given 30 extra feats and still feel a little tight, so seriously, Keep It Stupidly Simple. If your GM is willing to consider playing with the Elephant in the Room feat tax rules, the Occultist definitely benefits to a huge degree.
* Never forget to address the weaknesses of psychic casting, specifically emotion components. Having more spells known than other ⅔ casters doesn’t do you a bit of good if you get hit with a fear aura and immediately lose access to all your spells for an entire combat. Take proactive steps to improve your Will save, your saves vs. mind-affecting effects, your saves vs. emotion effects, and your saves vs. fear effects, in that order. Mind-affecting effects are usually subsidiaries of Will saves, emotion effects are usually subsidiaries of mind-affecting effects, and fear effects are usually subsidiaries of emotion effects. Patching something further up the food chain tends to have trickle-down effects that help you throw off unwanted emotional intrusions.
* Don’t act as the party’s main martial combatant unless you really know what you’re doing. Without heavy armor proficiency, a d10 Hit Die, static bonuses to attack and damage rolls, and class features like divine grace or parry and riposte, you’re never going to be as hardy on the front line as Swashbucklers, Fighters, Paladins, Cavaliers, Barbarians, Bloodragers, or Rangers. Doesn’t mean you can’t slum it with the full-BABers for a few rounds, but remember that ¾-BAB ⅔ casters are fundamentally strikers at heart, dancing in for big hits before sliding out of reach again. Just because Trappings of the Warrior can give you the BAB needed to hit more accurately doesn’t mean that frontline combat is intended to be your sole responsibility.
* Remember all the team buffing you’re capable of. Implements can be given to teammates, who then benefit from your resonant powers! Temporarily loaning out implements shores up team weaknesses in a big way, like giving your party’s Wizard a transmutation implement with a +6 enhancement bonus to Constitution stored up. Score! Or what about giving an illusion implement to a Sorcerer for that sweet, sweet 50% Distortion miss chance and all-day invisibility? Score again! Focus powers can often be used on teammates, too, albeit sometimes at a higher cost. Be the bigger person and admit that you’re not always the right tool for the job! Sometimes your Rogue needs that Legacy Weapon, not you.
________________
