# The Chassis

The Chassis


d8 Hit Die: It’s a well-established rule that ⅔ casters with ¾ BAB progression get a d8 Hit Die. Occultists can be sturdier than some d8 HD classes, thanks to medium armor, a good Fortitude save progression, and their various focus powers, but you probably won’t want to let Constitution sink below 12—and you’ll want to get it to 14 if you reasonably can at point buy.


¾ BAB or Full BAB Progression: How many classes do you know that can be a ¾-BAB class one day, and a full-BAB class the next? Well, Occultists can be through their Trappings of the Warrior panoply! This wonderful ability to flex into full BAB can make Occultists excellent strikers and tanks one day, shifting into different roles as their mental focus pool allows.


Skills: 4 + Intelligence skill ranks per level isn’t exactly skill monkey territory, but your generally good class skill list, high Intelligence modifier, and ability to take advantage of resonant powers from your implement schools and panoplies will mean that you’re much more skill-oriented in practice than you appear on paper. If your group hasn’t investigated the Background Skills ruleset, I highly recommend you do so; Appraise and Knowledge (History) are two class skills that wouldn’t normally get much love, but they’re right at home thematically on an Occultist, and they’re both Background Skills. Here are all the skills available to you—if it’s italicized, that means that it’s a class skill.


   * Use Magic Device: Occultists love, love, love using magical items, so much so that they get an entire class feature to make them better at UMD checks. This is a huge benefit to you! Thanks to the way your implement schools interact with your spellcasting, you’ll need to roll UMD checks for all but 49 spells in the game, and that includes the vast majority of spells that are technically on your spell list. UMD is essential for Occultists, and should always receive your maximum level of investment.
   * Note: UMD is based off of your Charisma score, which is likely to be low unless you’re a Silksworn Occultist. The Pragmatic Activator trait instead bases your skill bonus off of Intelligence, which is much more in our wheelhouse. You’d be well-advised to take it.
   * Knowledge (Arcana, Planes, Religion): With high Intelligence scores and three excellent monster identification Knowledge skills on their list, Occultists are set to be pretty handy at picking out weaknesses and recalling information. Planes gets you outsiders, Arcana gets you dragons, magical beasts, and constructs, and Religion gets you undead. That’s a pretty significant minority of enemies, if it isn’t quite a majority.
   * Knowledge (Dungeoneering, Local, Nature): You don’t get these Knowledge skills on your class list, but they’re useful for monster identification anyway. I’d add at least one rank to each so that you can at least roll on these skill checks. If you have the option to pick them up as class skills via traits, doing so is a good idea.
   * Perception: Perception is the god-skill of Pathfinder, determining whether you get to participate in surprise rounds, notice traps, find clues or loot, and more. You’d be maxing out your ranks here anyway, but the fact that it’s a class skill is just icing on the cake. Consider a cheap magical item like eyes of the eagle to help you out even more in this area, and talk to your GM about increasing the competence bonus as time goes on (custom magic item rules would dictate that it’s 2,500 gp for a +5, 10,000 gp for a +10, and 22,500 gp for a +15). Bonuses here can be especially important if you intend to use the Mind Eye focus power to magically scout locations ahead of time, as the sensor uses your Perception bonus to notice hidden creatures, loot, traps, etc.
   * Spellcraft: Spellcraft is kind of like the Knowledge check for identifying casters; you won’t generally need to use it for identifying magical items, thanks to your object reading class feature.
   * Acrobatics, Escape Artist: Occultists aren’t generally the most athletic of types—no Climb, no Swim, no Acrobatics, no Escape Artist, no Ride. They’re basically the anti-Swashbucklers of the Pathfinder world. Anyway, Acrobatics and Escape Artist are permanently useful skills for maneuvering around foes into flanking, avoiding attacks of opportunity, escaping grapples or restraints, and more. You could feasibly pick these up as class skills with a trait, although you’ll probably have bigger priorities.
   * Fly: Occultists get fly on their spell list and the incredible Mind Over Gravity focus power from the transmutation implement school, so they’ll darn well take ranks in Fly. You need to make Fly checks for a variety of aerial acrobatics, and even though the maneuverability boosts in fly and Mind Over Gravity can help you hit those checks, a few ranks will never go amiss. Do note, however, that you can’t put ranks into Fly unless you actually have a means of flight, for example with a glider or spell/focus power.
   * Sense Motive: Everybody hates having the wool pulled over their eyes, and Sense Motive is great both for detecting lies and detecting enchantment effects. This won’t be your wheelhouse nearly as much as classes like the Investigator or Inquisitor, but ranks never hurt. Nobody likes the consequences of being terminally gullible.
   * Stealth: Stealth is never a bad skill to have ranks in. Remember that (relatively) cheap armor enchantments like the shadow or creeping armor enchantments can make you much better at Stealth.
   * Diplomacy: A little bit of Diplomacy is never a bad idea, but Occultists in general weren’t made to be party faces. The exception might be with the Orator feat, but if you’re going that road, you’ll need Linguistics, not Diplomacy.
   * Note: The Student of Philosophy trait can base your skill bonus off of Intelligence, rather than Charisma, in much the same way that Pragmatic Activator can for UMD checks. It’s not a bad idea for a trait if you’re not taking Reactionary or a save-boosting trait.
   * Disable Device: From lockpicking to disarming traps, Disable Device is a generally useful skill. You’re never going to be as good at this as a Rogue, but having at least one rank invested allows you to aid a party member’s Disable Device check, so long as you’re not aiding a check to disable a magical trap or something you wouldn’t be able to do on your own—always a mitzvah. If you’re wearing heavy armor, you the armor check penalty may be bad enough that you forego this path entirely.
   * Heal: Useful for stabilizing allies, treating disease, etc., but not a priority by any means.
   * Linguistics: With the Orator feat, Occultists can actually become good party faces. If you’re not getting Orator, just put one rank in here for the class skill bonus. If you’re playing with the Background Skills ruleset, Linguistics is among the most useful background skills you can invest in, so consider Orator a little more strongly if you’re playing with those rules.
   * Survival: Okay for wilderness games. Other classes will blow past you, though.
   * Appraise: Thematically appropriate for the Occultist, but pretty useless.
   * Bluff, Intimidate: Occultists weren’t really meant to be party faces unless they’ve either taken the Silksworn archetype, are playing with the Performer’s Accoutrements panoply, or are using the Orator feat in order to parlay the Linguistics skill into social dominance. Let someone else take care of this unless you match one of those three scenarios.
   * Climb, Swim: Occultists can become some of the best flyers in the game, so I don’t necessarily think you need Climb under any circumstances. The drowning rules are pretty brutal, though, so you might want to dump a few ranks into Swim, grab a ring of swimming, etc. Alternatively, go with the Geomancer archetype in order to get terrain-specific spells handed to you on a platter.
   * Craft, Profession, Perform: Useless unless you’re building for something special. Profession skills can be a good investment if you’re playing with the Background Skills ruleset, but Craft Wondrous Item and similar feats are unfortunately poor choices for Occultists due to their extremely limited spell selection.
   * Disguise: Some of the focus powers in the illusion implement school can give you mongo bonuses to Disguise, but in general, the skill is pretty weak. Get a hat of disguise unless you’re truly building for infiltration.
   * Note: If you are building for infiltration, the Clever Wordplay trait lets you base Disguise checks off of Intelligence. Good for Performer’s Accoutrements builds.
   * Handle Animal, Ride: You’re no Hunter. Move on.
   * Knowledge (Engineering, History): If you’re playing with the Background Skills ruleset, both Engineering and History can have their uses. If not, sock one point in these skills for the class skill bonus and never look back.
   * Knowledge (Geography, Nobility): No uses for these, even in a Background Skills game. They’re not on your class list, so you might as well skip ‘em.
   * Sleight of Hand: You’re no Rogue. Again, one rank for the class skill bonus, then no more.


Armor Proficiencies: Psychic spells don’t have any spell failure chances, so Occultists can feel free to pursue light or medium armor however they wish. Strength-based Occultists will typically pick medium armor or take a feat to progress into heavy armor, while Dexterity- and Intelligence-based Occultists will typically pick light armor. There’s no wrong answer—it just depends on what your build priorities are. Don’t sleep on shields, either! A +4 suit of armor and a +3 shield cost the same together as a +5 suit of armor on its own, so there are definite cost-benefit considerations to take into account here. Even a buckler can really help.


Weapon Proficiencies: Martial weapon proficiency opens up new vistas of exploration for the Occultist that are not available to several other ¾-BAB classes. Falchions, greataxes, earthbreakers, greatswords, kukris, rapiers, longbows—it’s all up for grabs.


Good Fortitude and Will Saves, Bad Reflex Save: Fortitude and Will are, without any question at all, the two most important saves in Pathfinder. Reflex can always be patched, but there’s no substitute for good Fortitude and Will saves. Helps you take a lickin’ and keep on kickin’.
