# Survey of Divine Classes

## The Inquisitor vs. The Cleric

Let’s begin with pure mechanics: class structure, spell list, and domain powers. For starters, Clerics get a full 9 levels of spellcasting; although Battle Clerics exist thanks to divine casters’ lack of spell failure in armor, most Clerics will lean into the caster side of their role. Clerics also prepare their spells each day, similar to the Wizard, which means that they can react more flexibly to different situations, as long as they had a good hunch at preparation time which spells the day might call for. Domains affect Clerics more strongly than they do Inquisitors (for those unfamiliar with divine casters, Domains are thematic suites of abilities granted by deities that grant bonus spells as well as special abilities that can typically be used several times per day): one Cleric with the Nobility and Luck domains might be a powerful buffer, whereas a different cleric might go the debuffing route with the Madness or Darkness domain. Inquisitors get one Domain that grants them zero bonus spells, causing them to feel less wedded to the theme than Clerics do.

In contrast with the more caster-ish feel of Clerics, Inquisitors were clearly designed to feel more at home amid the chaos of battle. Their Judgment, Bane, and Solo Tactics abilities coupled with their self-buffs put their offensive capabilities far ahead of Clerics. To make up for their sheer damage output, Inquisitors are less versatile than Clerics in their spellcasting, due to their spontaneous casting mechanic—think of them like divine versions of the Bard class. As an Inquisitor player, you'll be able to cast any spell you know at any time, but that makes your choice of which spells you know that much more important: a spell has to be consistently, universally effective in order to get the nod from an Inquisitor, while Clerics can afford to mix and match niche spells as needed. Outside of combat, Inquisitors are able to conserve spell slots through their skill bonuses, and can easily take on the role of party face with minimal investment. Clerics, meanwhile, are often stuck casting spells to get results.

In terms of roleplay flavor, Clerics feel much more attached to the everyday goings-on of their religion: they often live and interact with other clergy members or faithful on a daily basis, and are expected to regularly perform all the rites, rituals, and duties of their office. Clerics also attempt to align themselves as closely as possible with the ideals of their deity—indeed, they can incur divine retribution if they don't. Inquisitors get to occupy a much more nebulous space within the overall tapestry of their faith (which suits them just fine!) leading to more heterogeneous roles and personalities. Maybe you see members of your faith every day; maybe you spend months infiltrating other religions or cults. Maybe you answer to the ecclesiastical hierarchy of your church; maybe you answer only to your own interpretation of your deity's code. Maybe you wear the symbol of your god openly on your person; maybe no one knows which god you serve until it's too late. If Clerics are the black and the white, then Inquisitors are the gray.

tl;dr for combat: Clerics are good, versatile spellcasters, but will never be combat monsters without specific builds; Inquisitors are combat-effective very quickly thanks to Judgment and Bane, but have weaker, more rigid spellcasting.

tl;dr for out of combat: Clerics need spells to make up for skills, and strive to embody all aspects of their deities; Inquisitors use skills well already, and pick and choose aspects of their deity to fight for, usually not subscribing part and parcel to the doctrine.

## The Inquisitor vs. The Paladin

Speaking of the black and the white: Paladins. To the outside observer, Paladins seem like those Lawful Stupid guys and gals who just can't leave well enough alone; much like Clerics, however, there's a very good reason why they can't leave well enough alone: they risk having their powers and abilities stripped from them if they fall too far from the ideals of their deities. As the player of a Paladin, you care less about whether you achieved the aims of your faith than about how you achieved the aims of your faith. If a Paladin of Abadar has to lie, cheat, swindle, and extort in order to topple that corrupt judge, then she is no Paladin in the eyes of her god. The victory was no victory at all. An Inquisitor of Abadar, however, may have considerably more latitude in how to restore justice: catch the judge accepting a bribe that the Inquisitor herself arranged? Fake a religious vision to scare the judge straight? Preach to the masses until an armed mob stages a coup? Abadar is Lawful, but his Inquisitors don't necessarily need to act lawfully at all times—so long as the overall agenda of law, order, and civilization is advanced.

Paladins' reputation of being Lawful Stupid also comes from the fact that they're, well, limited by which stats they're incentivized to bump. You need good CHA for spells, smites, saves...but you also need STR, CON, and some DEX to be an adequate front-line tank. Naturally, you dump both INT and WIS to achieve good scores in the other four attributes. Now what? Your Perception is shit, and even when you notice that someone is acting suspiciously, your Sense Motive is also shit. 2 + INT skill points per level doesn't leave much breathing room in out-of-combat roles, so you'll probably pick Diplomacy and Knowledge (Religion) and call it a day. Congratulations, you're now stuck roleplaying a Golden Retriever. Inquisitors, on the other hand, feel much more flexible: Stern Gaze gives you excellent bonuses to both Intimidate and Sense Motive, and with 6 + INT skill ranks per level, a WIS focus, Perception on the class list, and your various detect [alignment] spells, the wool just can't be pulled over your eyes. You're wool-proof. Having so many of the bases covered naturally leaves Inquisitors free to specialize: do you want to be a mage hunter, a divine rogue, a social skill monster, an assassin for your deity, a tactical terrifier? The choice is entirely yours.

The price that the Inquisitor pays for her increased flexibility and spell levels, of course, is that they're much more up-and-down combatants than Paladins. Inquisitors require one swift action for Judgment, one swift action for Bane, possibly several standard or swift actions to self-buff, and a few move actions to get positioned for Teamwork feats before they're "ramped up" and ready to truly wreck face. Paladins? They don't need any wind-up time. They just run in and beat enemies to a pulp with full BAB, heavy armor, unbeatable saves, self-healing, and immunity to fear, disease, and charm effects; the only tactical decisions they have to make in the course of a combat are when and whom to Smite. Their steady strength actually turns Lawful Stupid to their advantage: they're as obvious as a fox in a hen house on the battlefield, which diverts attention away from the squishier party members—including you. In combat, Inquisitors let the Fighters and Paladins have the spotlight for a bit as they make their preparations and get their buffs rolling. Once Bane, Judgment, wrath, and divine power are in effect, any enemy of any alignment can be turned into a fine red mist within a round or two.

tl;dr for combat: Paladins are steady-state tanks who don't need much help to perform in combat; Inquisitors need a period of "wind-up" at the start of combat, after which they excel at high levels of single-target burst damage.

tl;dr for out of combat: Paladins are bound by their alignment, stat blocks, and limited skills, making Lawful Stupid and a sole focus on Diplomacy or face skills too easy to fall into; Inquisitors can solve problems laterally, both in terms of their skill set and how they're willing to employ that skill set.

## The Inquisitor vs. The Warpriest

In combat, Warpriests feel like a combination of Paladins and Inquisitors. Like Paladins in that they are sturdier (thanks, heavy armor and swift-cast healing) and smashier (thanks, bonus combat feats); like Inquisitors in that their action economy is complicated (thanks, swift-cast buffs), they take a few rounds to reach their peak, and their damage is capable of spiking to sickening levels (thanks, Sacred Weapon) once they hit that peak. If we were to draw an analogy to modern military roles, Warpriests are the shock troopers, while Inquisitors are special ops; they've got about the same damage output, but they achieve it in entirely different ways. Thanks to Warpriests' ability to mimic full-BAB classes for the purpose of meeting feat prerequisites, their bonus combat feats, and their boosts to weapon damage regardless of what the weapon is, Warpriests can often go for more complex or later-blooming builds like Vital Strike, Cleave, unarmed, or thrown weapon builds that Inquisitors simply don't have the feats or early entry for. As an Inquisitor player, you will likely need to stick to the basics with your combat feats in order to come up with a fully-baked, effective build.

Those distinctions carry over into general adventuring, too—Warpriests are never subtle. They're the kind of people who won't shut up about whether you've accepted Sithrak as your god yet or not, and might just burn your house down if you take too long to decide. Admirable wrecking balls when pointed in the right direction, but not the kinds of people you want undertaking sensitive, independent investigations. Compounding the issue is their lack of skill ranks per level, which forces them to rely on spells out of combat. Relying on a skill monkey is fine when you're with the whole group, but Warpriests would have difficulty interrogating someone, navigating through an aristocratic party, or picking out the perp with their eyes shut. The skill ranks that Inquisitors get lead to mechanical independence, which in turn leads to RP independence.

tl;dr for combat: Warpriests put out egregious amounts of damage, and more closely resemble Fighters in their builds; Inquisitors stick to a few tried-and-true combat builds, while relying on buff spells, Teamwork feats, Bane, and Judgment to keep their damage output high.

tl;dr for out of combat: Warpriests are divine Hulks (AM SMASH) with all the subtlety that role entails; Inquisitors can operate alone or in a team, shuffling skill ranks around as needed to fill just about any role in a team's composition.

## Conclusions

If we were to rank our four divine classes in various areas, they might look like this:

Offense: Inquisitor = Warpriest = Paladin (vs. Evil enemies) > Paladin (vs. non-Evil enemies) > Cleric

Defense: Paladin > Warpriest = Cleric > Inquisitor

Spellcasting: Cleric > Inquisitor = Warpriest > Paladin

Utility: Inquisitor > Cleric > Warpriest > Paladin

Some conclusions we can draw about the niche that Inquisitors are meant to fill:

Inquisitors should not try to tank. You can take a hit decently enough, and you have some tools for escaping sticky situations, but you never want to leave an enemy alive long enough to retaliate if you can help it. Medium armor, d8 hit die, and no real bonus to saves (stalwart excluded) do not a tank make, so try to ensure that the deadliest targets in a combat are also the deadest, preferably before they realize they should be focusing their tender ministrations on you.

Inquisitors should try to get as many extra attacks as possible, within reason. Thanks to Judgment, Bane, and self-buffs, Inquisitors can boost themselves into full-BAB territory when attacking. Core Monks will look on you with greenest envy as you proclaim that accuracy has “just never been an issue.” Importantly, however, Inquisitors are not a full-BAB class: at ¾ BAB, you qualify for BAB-gated feats slowly and your iterative attack progression is delayed. Because Inquisitors can deal an additional 2d6 damage per attack (4d6 in later levels) through Bane, you need as many extra attacks as you can reasonably get. Two-Weapon Fighting, as we'll see in the Combat Styles section, isn't a great way of achieving this goal, but buff spells like haste and feats like Rapid Shot are just the drugs to satiate our attack habit.

Inquisitors should use their spell slots primarily to self-buff. You will never have the save DCs of full casters. Repeat that to yourself every time you sit down at your table like you're at a ¾ Casters Anonymous meeting. Unless you invest significantly (and even with significant investment your offensive casting is likely to be mediocre) you will not be able to use debuff, blast, or save-or-suck spells reliably, ever. This limitation is a blessing in disguise, however, because it clarifies the purpose of your spellcasting: to self-buff. The Inquisitor spell list features some wonderful self-buffs that you should be positively salivating to get your hands on. Divine power, wrath, magic circle, acute senses—the list goes on and on. You get some team buff spells like bless or communal protection from energy and should use them as pre-combat buffs if possible. In combat, however, your spells are for you, so don't feel bad about buffing yourself into a frothing cloud of steel and divine retribution and tearing the field apart like you were meant to.

Inquisitors should pick spells that are always, always useful. It's an old precept for spontaneous casters, but a good one to remember: barring certain favored class bonuses, you will only ever know 6 spells per spell level. That's not a great variety. When you find yourself thinking about choosing a spell for your spells known on your next level-up, first ask yourself whether you'd use it every day (or nearly). If your answer is "no," you're not picking a good spell known—you're picking a good scroll or wand. Spells known should be your warhorses, your standbys, your old chestnuts. The best ones can function in and out of combat, against every enemy type, with a good effect, and preferably without a save if it affects an enemy. Tall order, yes, but those criteria really help separate the wheat from the chaff.

Inquisitors should leverage their skills wisely. Monster Lore makes you great at Knowledges; where does your team have gaps in those skills? Stern Gaze makes you excellent at sniffing out lies and intimidating people; how can you turn those skills to your advantage? Some archetypes can do stealth, trapfinding, bluffing; does your party need a Rogue alternative? Inquisitors can do lots of things (and some, like Intimidate, even have uses in combat) but the responsibility of deciding exactly what your Inquisitor does lies with you.

Inquisitors should work toward the goals of their deity without worrying too much about their methods. Inquisitors are the living embodiment of the famous Machiavelli quote: "The ends justify the means." If you can keep your hands clean and still accomplish something, extra brownie points to you, but Inquisitors aren't afraid of getting their hands dirty, either.

Summing up. You specialize in single-target burst damage after one or two rounds of "wind-up." Through judicious use of skills, spells, class abilities, and Teamwork feats, you have a plethora of combat tricks up your sleeve, and while your access to them will be patchy at first, you'll eventually have enough coverage between them to keep you combat-effective all day long. Your 3/4 BAB progression, lack of bonus feats, middling spell DCs, and spontaneous casting don't allow many of the tricks of full martials (maneuvers; feat-heavy combat builds; oodles of iteratives) or full casters (save-or-suck spells; preparation of situational or niche spells; metamagic feats like Quickened Spell) but you'll be able to do everything at 85% where they'll be stuck doing one thing at 100% and everything else at 20%. You can be built into damn near anything, which means that you'll need to discuss the party's composition needs closely with your GM and teammates.

(Image Source)

“I love rumors! Facts can be so misleading, where rumors, true or false, are often revealing.”

— Col. Hans Landa, Inquisitor
