# Overview — Welcome to the Inquisition

Introduced in the Advanced Player’s Guide, Inquisitors are everything that I love to roleplay: single-minded, “for the Greater Good” religious warriors, menacing and uncannily observant, who fear little—even the retribution of their gods. Yet if you look online in forum topics about the Inquisitor, you'll see many players who think that the class is something of a walking identity crisis, at least mechanically. As a ¾ divine caster, you can't control the battlefield or slay enemies with spells like a Wizard or Sorcerer; as a ¾ BAB class with a d8 hit die, you can't expect to hop into combat and tank all day; as a 6 + INT skill class, you can’t get away with zero out-of-combat contributions. You're MAD, requiring decent scores in at least four attributes—STR, DEX, CON, and WIS—with visible benefits to boosting the other two. You get Teamwork feats aplenty, but not the ability to share them with teammates; your spell list mirrors the “me first” attitude. The Inquisitor class chassis is a mysterious parcel addressed to you, the player, with no note.

Behind the purely mechanical questions of how to build and play Inquisitors lie broader questions about what Inquisitors are: where they fit into the scheme of faith and religion on Golarion, and where the similarities and differences lie between Inquisitors and their other divine brethren (notably Clerics, Warpriests, and Paladins). Being a newer class in the scheme of the Pathfinder system, Inquisitors have fewer publisher-official guidelines than do Clerics or Paladins, which have existed in some iteration since Advanced Dungeons & Dragons. Larger supplements like Inner Sea Gods can get us part of the way there, but the rest of our conclusions are left to extrapolation. To help us explore the mechanical and existential niche of the Inquisitor, therefore, we'll look at the class alongside three other divine classes, and in the end make some educated guesses about how Paizo sees Inquisitors as distinct from the rest of the pack. As a standard disclaimer that applies to this entire guide, I (like everyone who plays RPGs) have a limited knowledge base to draw from. Rules are complex; sometimes I misinterpret them. My understanding of Golarion’s politics, pantheon, and history is imperfect. I may not be up to date on the latest errata. I may make mistakes! Send me an e-mail about those mistakes, and I promise to amend them as best I can while crediting you, the reader.

And now, cry “Onward!” to some general thoughts about Inquisitors:

As with all of the divine classes, there is no such thing as a "stock" Inquisitor, because each Inquisitor serves a different deity; even two Inquisitors worshipping the same deity might cleave to different aspects of that deity’s aims or domain portfolio, leading to wildly divergent roleplay styles.

My opinion is that, whichever deity you choose, Inquisitors are best built and roleplayed with the aims of your deity in mind. Although you can cheese your way into a strictly "optimal" Inquisitor who takes all the right feats at exactly the right times, what’s the use of playing a divine servitor of Gozreh if you don’t whip out your +3 Trident of Sub-Optimal DPR every once in a while? Inquisitors get plenty of tricks on their own without any investment from the player, and frankly speaking, your GM will probably thank you for not munchkining the class too much, because they’re already capable of putting out nauseating levels of damage. As a GM myself, I advocate strongly for bonus flavor feats, the bonus skill point system introduced in Pathfinder Unchained, and other house rules that some would deride as Power Creep. However, I also insist that my PCs not optimize too heavily: compelling characters have realistic flaws and weaknesses, and it’s a royal pain in the arse to have to accommodate one uber-gamer in the bunch when everyone else is just trying to tell a good story. Your mileage may vary! Throughout this guide, you’ll often see traditionally sub-optimal choices marked in black.

Unlike Clerics and Paladins, who are bound to codes of conduct and try to embody all aspects of their deities, Inquisitors are morally flexible, often choosing to follow only one of their deity’s aspects, duties, or qualities. Perhaps you're okay with going sober for a night as an Inquisitor of Cayden Cailean if it means that you'll be able to liberate those slaves more effectively; perhaps an Inquisitor of Pharasma might work with a lesser necromancer temporarily, as long as doing so enables them to crush that powerful cult trying to turn one of their members into a lich. Morality and ethics can be hazy to an Inquisitor, as they always are when your motto is "The Ends Justify the Means."

From the minute you decide to play an Inquisitor, it behooves you to start thinking about which "corner" of your deity's broader agenda you want to devote yourself to. Which tenets are you willing to give your life to uphold? Which are you willing to bend—or even break? Which transgressions goad you into immediate action, and which are you willing to bide your time over? More than many other classes, Inquisitors have the potential to make our mutual Pathfinder story richer through their convergence of the ideals of faith and brutal, pragmatic reality. It's your job (and your GM's job) to make that story as fascinating as possible.
